1️⃣ The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems.
1️⃣ An Expression of Worship and Promise to Compose.
2️⃣ I prostrate to the mighty Muni, the lord of philosophical systems, Who saw everything in the untold billions of philosophical systems, Refuted the positions of ill-spoken philosophical systems, And gave teachings on the principles of pure philosophical systems.
I prostrate respectfully to the Unconquerable and to Mañjughoṣa, Who possessed the entire secret treasury of the Conqueror’s speech And ordained the banquet of profound and extensive Dharma With various emanations in countless fields.
1️⃣ May victory come to the two eyes of the world known as Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga, who, Distinguishing well between definitive and provisional scriptures, illuminated the great chariot-paths of Madhyamaka and Cittamātra Exactly as prophesied by the Conqueror himself when he said, “There will rise a conjunct sun and moon Who will open well, respectively, the hundred-petaled lotus and night-lily gardens of the two ways.”
1️⃣ I bow respectfully to the ornaments that beautify Jambudvīpa: Āryadeva, Aśvaghoṣa, Bhāvaviveka, Buddhapālita, Candrakīrti, Śāntideva, Vasubandhu, Haribhadra, Sthiramati, Dignāga, Dharmakīrti, Guṇaprabha, and Śākyaprabhā.
I make prostrations as well to the assembly of mighty yogins who, Drunk on the beer of bliss and emptiness, join with their great secret songs In the banquet of fortunate supreme adepts In the palace of the supreme vehicle, highest yoga tantra.
I bow down, remembering the kindness of the translators, pandits, and Dharma kings, Who, with the strength of the green horse of their arousal of the awakening mind, Drew the great light of the sun of the holy Dharma to this land, Which, though surrounded by snow mountains, was covered with the darkness of confusion.
I bow to all the supreme beings who, appearing different yet sharing a single nature, Spread in this Land of Snows the ways of many different philosophical systems, Which, though differently elucidated, come down to a single ultimate intention, Like rivers and streams descending separately but mingling in a single ocean.
1️⃣ I bow from my heart to the great lord Dīpaṃkara, who lovingly and unstintingly bestowed on his Tibetan disciples The mighty king of teachings on the awakening mind, brought from Suvarṇadvīpa after many hardships.
1️⃣ And I bow as well to the second conqueror and his spiritual sons; he took as his own the complete teaching of the Muni, and through his excellent explanations And the marvel of a life lived purely, he opened the way of the Gandenpa, the greatest way of all.
I prostrate to the upholders of the Ganden teaching, Who set atop the victory banner of explanation and practice The wish-granting jewel of the unstained tradition of the protector And sent down the inexhaustible rain of all that is virtuous, good, and desirable.
1️⃣ I exalt at my crown Amitābha and Lokeśvara, The mighty conquerors, father and son, Who, performing in saffron robes, cause the unremitting increase Of the highest essence of the teaching of the Muni until samsara ends.
Until enlightenment, may there remain at the center of my heart the incomparably kind three-aspected gurus, Who, empowered by love for beings as if they were their own children, open the door to the inexhaustible Dharma treasury of the secret mind, The mentors who freely bestow the essence of the wealth of excellent explanation, and in particular The actualization of all buddhas, Rölpai Dorjé, and those named Maitripāda and Ratna.
Thus, with words of praise And with flowers held in the folded hands of faith, I have worshipped the great lord of the teaching, The Muni, along with his spiritual sons and their students.
1️⃣ Many, under the sway of anger, have deprecated The Dharmas and persons of other systems Without even knowing how to properly distinguish among The various philosophical systems in this land.
1️⃣ Many, under the sway of the four negative tendencies, Failing to ascertain any reason For the special distinctiveness of their own philosophical system, And driven only by confusion and desire, still hold their system as supreme.
1️⃣ In order to set them in conscientiousness, I will briefly discuss here The sources and standpoints of the philosophical systems That arose in the Holy Land of India and in Tibet and China.
If any there are with honest eyes, Free of the cataracts of partiality, They should view the many wondrous forms that appear In this white crystal mirror of excellent explanation.
1️⃣ A General Explanation of the Project Now, countless are the ways in which logicians have conceived and established philosophical systems amid the world systems as measureless as space, and likewise the very pure philosophical systems that arose from the awakening mind and deeds of the Muni, the Buddha, the Blessed One are beyond number, so who could discuss the countless ways in which they arose?
Here, I will discuss just briefly how different philosophical systems arose in particular lands in Jambudvīpa and the unique standpoints of each system.
This text, then, is fivefold: I. The history of philosophical systems in the Holy Land of India; II.
Their history in Tibet, the Land of Snows; III.
1️⃣ Their history in the land of Great China; IV.
Their history in some other places; and V. The conclusion, which explains the outcome.
Part I is twofold: A. The history of the non-Buddhist extremists and B. The history of the Buddhists.
Section A is threefold: The story of how the extremists arose; A brief explanation of their standpoints; and The purpose of explaining those.
1️⃣ Indian Schools I. The History of Philosophical Systems in the Holy Land of India A. The history of the non-Buddhist extremists The story of how the extremists arose FOR A LONG TIME after this world had come into being, humans here in Jambudvīpa enjoyed uncultivated crops, but then lazy people began hoarding food, so farming became necessary.
Then greedy people took what had not been given to them, and because of the discord that resulted, it became necessary to appoint a leader who could pass judgment.
The first leader was called King Saṃmāta (“Honored by Many”).
Seeing the king punish some evildoers at that time saddened certain beings, who then went to solitary places in the forest and remained there; thus arose the brahmans.
Some of these hermits reduced their desires and achieved satisfaction; sitting alone, they isolated mind and body and so attained tranquil abiding.
When they then gained supernormal and magical powers, they were called “seers. ”
1️⃣ Of those, many who had attained supernormal powers and trained in logic analyzed their own minds, set forth a path for attaining liberation and higher rebirth, and wrote texts that laid out the logical reasons proving that path.
1️⃣ It was through this that the philosophical systems of the extremists spread.
1️⃣ The first to arise was the Sāṃkhya.
During the period of measureless lifespans there lived a seer called Kapila (“Yellow-White”), who had long yellow-white hair and possessed the five supernormal powers.
1️⃣ Relying on his innate wisdom, he composed many texts. His followers were known as Sāṃkhyas (“Enumerators”) or Kāpilīyas. When the human lifespan was twenty thousand years, there lived a seer named Vyāsa (“Spreader”).
1️⃣ His followers were called Vaiyasins or Nirgranthas (“Naked Ones”).
1️⃣ There was also a seer named Lokākṣī who was quite skilled in logic.
He fornicated with his own daughter, denied past and future lives, and composed manifold texts ascribing no benefits to virtue or disadvantages to vice.
1️⃣ His followers, the Lokāyatas, were the worst of the extremists.
Then came the seer called Handsome One.
1️⃣ Mahādeva had made him the protector of his consort, Umā, and Umā lusted after the seer Handsome One.
1️⃣ Sitting before him, she displayed many alluring manifestations, but the seer lowered his eyes to his feet.
1️⃣ Because he guarded his own austerity, Mahādeva was pleased and permitted him to compose texts.
1️⃣ The seer was known as Akṣapāda, and his followers were known as Akṣapādins or Naiyāyikas.
1️⃣ The followers of two later seers, Ulūka and Kaṇāda, were called Vaiśeṣikas.
1️⃣ A brief explanation of the standpoints of the extremists.
It is explained in the sutras that there are ninety-six strange views, fourteen indeterminate views, sixty-two debased views, twenty-eight unholy views, twenty debased views, and so forth.
There are explanations in Bhāvaviveka’s Blaze of Logic how there are one hundred and ten categories of views, and in his Precious Lamp of Madhyamaka how there are three hundred categories of views.
However, as the mighty Lord of Knowledge says, “wrong paths are limitless,” so it is difficult to determine all the debased views of those lacking the intelligence to distinguish the path from the nonpath and say: “This one is and this one isn’t.”
2️⃣ Thus the number of philosophical systems with debased views is not held to be definite.
2️⃣ I will just explain in brief the standpoints of some of the more famous ones.
2️⃣ I divide the views of the philosophical systems of non-Buddhists into two: proponents of eternalism and proponents of nihilism.
2️⃣ It is said that the proponents of nihilism are the Lokāyatas, while the proponents of eternalism are eight: Sāṃkhyas, Brahmavādins, Vaiṣṇavas, Mīmāṃsakas, Śaivas, Vaiśeṣikas, Naiyāyikas, and Nirgranthas.
1️⃣ The Lokāyatas are twofold: contemplatives and logicians.
Each of those is twofold: proponents of a nihilism in which past and future lives are asserted but cause and effect are not asserted, and proponents of a nihilism that absolutely denies past and future lives and cause and effect.
The way the logicians misstate things: They assert that even with effort no one is able to see the force that causes the sun to rise, the downward flow of water, the roundness of peas, the sharpness of thorns, or the multicolored splendor of the peacock, so these things must arise from their own self-nature; since they say that such things have no causes, they completely deny cause and effect.
Furthermore, they illustrate the mind’s dependence on the body through three similes: it has the same nature as the body, as in the example of liquor and its capacity to intoxicate; it is an effect of the body, as in the example of a butter lamp and its light; and it is a quality of the body, as in the example of a wall and the mural on it.
Therefore, just as an accidental lamp produces light accidentally, likewise, the accidental body produces the mind accidentally; thus, there is no coming into this life from a past life.
At the time of death, the body dissolves into the four great elements, and the sense faculties dissolve into space; they are destroyed.
1️⃣ Since body and mind are one substance, when the body is destroyed the mind is also destroyed, just as when the wall is destroyed its mural is also destroyed, and there is no transition from this life to a future life.
2️⃣ Thus they deny both past and future lives, and so also completely deny liberation.
Since there is no habituation to the path over many lives, there is no omniscience, and since there is no cause of suffering and other ills, there is neither a path that brings freedom from that suffering nor any freedom.
The contemplatives say that when you attain the mental absorptions and formless realms, and so forth, you have the perception of yourself as an arhat; but at the time of death, when your concentration degenerates, you foresee rebirth in a lower realm, and because of that, there is no arhatship in the world.
Some, having investigated with their clairvoyance and seen someone who had performed charity in this life becoming poor in a future life, say there is no cause and effect and completely deny that which is not seen by their own supernormal powers.
1️⃣ Maintaining that perception is the only type of valid cognition — and not asserting generally characterized phenomena, inference, and so forth — this school completely denies past and future lives, cause and effect, liberation, and omniscience.
2️⃣ Therefore, among non-Buddhists, they are the worst.
1️⃣ Sāṃkhyas The Sāṃkhyas, or Kāpiliyas, say that effects exist at the time of the cause and then become manifest through conditions.
1️⃣ They also are twofold: the atheistic Sāṃkhyas assert that cause and effect arise only from the principal, while the theistic Sāṃkhyas assert that even though causes and effects have the same nature, they transform into different manifestations through empowerment by the great god, Īśvara.
1️⃣ Sāṃkhyas assert definitively that all objects of knowledge are enumerated into twenty-five: the principal, the great, the I-principle, the five sense objects, the five elements, the eleven sense faculties, and the person, which is self, consciousness, and the knower.
1️⃣ Of those, the person is asserted as conscious, while the remaining twenty-four — as aggregate composites — are insentient matter.
Fundamental nature, the general, and the principal are asserted to be synonymous; they refer to an object of knowledge possessing six attributes.
1️⃣ Person, self, consciousness, and the knower are synonyms.
1️⃣ Intellect and the great are counted as a single term, which is asserted as something like the two-sided mirror on which appear reflections both of objects from the outside and of the person from the inside.
1️⃣ Sāṃkhyas say that the intellect is necessarily material, while consciousness must be the self.
The way they assert bondage and freedom: Whenever the person generates the desire to enjoy an object, the fundamental nature emanates manifestations such as sound and so forth.
1️⃣ Accordingly, from the principal comes the intellect, and from that arise the three I-principles.
1️⃣ The darkness-possessing I-principle urges forth the other two I-principles.
From the manifesting I-principle arise the five sense objects, namely, forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles; and from the essential-powered I-principle arise the eleven sense faculties, namely, the five faculties of intellect, the five faculties of the body, and the faculty of mind.
In addition, they assert that the fundamental nature, which is like a blind person with legs, and the person, which is like a cripple with eyes, are conflated; and we circle in samsara because we do not understand how manifestations are emanated by the fundamental nature.
When, by listening to the instruction directly imparted by a guru, we gain the distinctive ascertainment that “these manifestations are mere emanations of the fundamental nature,” at that time we gradually become free from attachment to that object, and through the mental absorptions, we generate the supernormal power of the divine eye.
1️⃣ When we regard the principal with that power, the principal is like another’s wife, who blushes with shame upon being seen; the manifestations are gathered in, and the fundamental nature abides alone.
1️⃣ Then, on the surface of the yogin’s intellect, all conventional appearances are turned away, and we abide without using objects and without activity: then, they assert, we have attained liberation.
1️⃣ Brahmavādins The Brahmavādins say that their teacher is Brahmā.
1️⃣ They are subdivided into Vaiyākaraṇikas, Vedāntins, and Guhyavādins.
1️⃣ They assert that all the world’s environs and inhabitants are created by Brahmā and that the only source of valid cognition is the Vedas.
They also state that, since the words of the Vedas are sounds not produced by a person, the Vedas show only true objects.
They assert that the method for achieving higher rebirths and the state of Brahmā is the horse sacrifice explained in the Vedic texts.
1️⃣ The Vaiyākaraṇikas state that Brahmā, in the form of the syllable oṃ, is the basis for the arising of the world’s various environs and inhabitants and is their self-nature.
Since it is without birth or death, it is permanent, spatially and temporally partless, truly pervades inner and outer objects, and is of a single nature, abiding absolutely.
1️⃣ They state that subjects and objects appear as dual to those who are polluted by ignorance.
The standpoint of the Tibetan Jonangpas appears to be close to this.
1️⃣ Vaiyākaraṇikas assert that the path effecting the attainment of liberation is, externally, making the fire offering of animal sacrifice, and internally, making the fire offering of dripping the male semen element into the hearth of the woman’s vagina; liberation is asserted as the clear emptiness and the bliss that then occur.
1️⃣ The Vedāntins, or Highest Brahmans, assert an entity called the person.
1️⃣ This is the “person” explained in the Vedas, which are the source of valid cognition; it is single; it is permanent because it is never destroyed; it is pure because it transcends suffering; it pervades all the manifold beings; it is undying because it has no beginning or end; it has the color of the sun; it has transcended the circle of darkness; it has become the great; and it is other than sleep.
1️⃣ That person is the self-nature of the gods and also the nature of Maheśvara.
From that person alone are produced all the three worlds, happiness and suffering, and bondage and freedom.
However, the nature of the person itself is unchanging and inexhaustible.
When, based on the mental absorptions, we view the person with the divine eye and see that person as golden colored, then, having equalized virtue and vice, samsara and nirvana, we become free.
1️⃣ The Guhyavādins are mostly like the Vedāntins; based on the Vedas, they assert a self that is conscious, knowing, permanent, partless, and single.
1️⃣ Vaiṣṇavas The Vaiṣṇavas take Viṣṇu as their teacher and say that Viṣṇu has two natures, tranquil and active.
Of these, the tranquil nature has: the nature of divine substance, a self-nature that neither exists nor does not exist, and a nature that is immortal; by meditating on that you attain liberation.
1️⃣ The active nature they explain as the ten avatars of Viṣṇu — the fish and the others.
They maintain that the self is permanent and partless, and explain that there is an end to samsara and that the path to freedom is meditation on the syllable oṃ, the vase-breath meditation, and so forth.
This system also asserts that samsara has an end; Vedāntins and a multitude of others are explained to be followers of this system.
1️⃣ Mīmāṃsakas The Mīmāṃsakas are followers of Jaiminī, so they are also called Jaiminīyas.
1️⃣ They assert that the self is the nature of intellect, is sentient, and is immaterial; that the intrinsic nature of consciousness and the knower is a permanent nature; that self is a discrete substantial existent; and that it is partless.
1️⃣ Their viewpoint on the Vedas as a source of valid cognition is like that of the previous schools.
They assert that there is attainment of higher rebirths, like the level of Brahmā, solely by sacrificial offerings and other practices.
They say that because that liberation is freedom from lower realms, it is a limited liberation; there is no liberation that is the complete pacification of suffering.
Also, because of the stains abiding in the intrinsic nature of mind, there can be no omniscience.
And, because objects of knowledge are countless, there is no true speech.
1️⃣ Most Mīmāṃsakas assert six sources of valid cognition, while the Cārakīya Jaiminīyas assert eleven sources of valid cognition and also teach a division into forty-eight functional forces, which are not set forth here.
1️⃣ Śaivas, Vaiśeṣikas, Naiyāyikas The trio of the Aiśvaras — or Śaivas — Vaiśeṣikas, and Naiyāyikas take Īśvara as their teacher.
Both the Vaiśeṣikas and Naiyāyikas may also include those who have made Brahmā and Viṣṇu their teachers, so members of those two groups may also be designated as Brahmavādins and Vaiṣṇavas.
1️⃣ The Vaiśeṣikas, as previously noted, are followers of a seer who mistook an owl for a god Ulūka and a seer who ate grain Kaṇāda, so they are also called Owlers Ālūkīyas and Grain Eaters Kaṇādīyas.
1️⃣ Also, the Naiyāyikas are followers of the aforementioned seer Akṣapāda, so they are also called Akṣapādins.
1️⃣ They all assert Īśvara to be omniscient and state that all the world’s environs and inhabitants proceed from Īśvara’s intellect.
1️⃣ They say that the path is the blisses arising from the vase-breath meditation, from the bestowal of initiation from the tip of Īśvara’s liṅgam, and from the emission of semen during sex with a woman.
1️⃣ They assert that liberation is the gnosis of the bliss of intercourse, which arises from the bliss of emitting semen.
1️⃣ The Vaiśeṣikas and Naiyāyikas: the former say that there are many distinctions of the general and the particular to be made via the six categories, so they are known as “Particularizers” (Vaiśeṣikas); the latter, because they are followers of the knowledge system created by the seer Akṣapāda, are known as “Knowledge Possessors” (Naiyāyikas).
1️⃣ The Vaiśeṣikas admit three sources of valid cognition: perception, inference, and scripture; the Naiyāyikas admit those three and also admit comparison as a source of valid cognition, making four.
1️⃣ Also, both schools assert three types of inference, three aspects of perfect logical reasons that are the basis of those inferences, and three fallacies that subvert a reason.
1️⃣ I will not address here their standpoints on the sixteen or eight categories of logic.
1️⃣ The practices for attaining liberation are ablution, receiving initiation, fasting, celibacy when residing in the guru’s home, dwelling in the forest, sacrificial offering, charity, and so forth.
1️⃣ In time, by cultivating a yoga learned through the guru’s instruction, we come to understand that the self is a different entity from the sense faculties, and so forth, and to see the real nature of the self.
2️⃣ And, when we fully comprehend the nature of the six categories, then we understand that the self is pervasive in nature but without activity, and we no longer accumulate any wholesome or unwholesome karma.
1️⃣ Since no new karma is accumulated, when the old karma is exhausted, the body that has already been taken — the faculties, the intellect, pleasures, pains, attachments, hatreds, and so forth — separates from the self; and since a new body and faculties are not taken, the continuum of rebirths is severed, as with a fire that has exhausted its firewood.
1️⃣ When the self abides alone, that is liberation.
2️⃣ So say the Naiyāyikas and Vaiśeṣikas.
1️⃣ The Nirgranthas are followers of the holy Jina and others, so they are known as Jainas.
1️⃣ They classify all objects of knowledge into nine categories; they say that trees and such possess mind; and they assert logical reasons proving that our teacher, the Buddha, is not omniscient.
With regard to liberation, they state that based on austerities such as nakedness, silence, exposure to the five fires, and so forth, we exhaust all previously created karma, and by not accumulating any new karma, we go to a place located above the whole world, the so-called composite world.
1️⃣ This world is shaped like an open upside-down umbrella, white like yogurt or a water lily, and measures 4.5 million leagues across.
1️⃣ Because it contains souls, that realm is material; because it is free from samsara, it also is nonmaterial.
That abode is called liberation.
1️⃣ So say the Nirgranthas.
1️⃣ h. Summary The logical reasons that negate those extremist standpoints are taught extensively in Candrakīrti’s Entering the Middle Way, the root text and commentary of Bhāvaviveka’s Heart of Madhyamaka and Blaze of Logic, Dharmakīrti’s Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition and Ascertainment of Valid Cognition, and other texts.
Among the extremist philosophical systems, the standpoints of three schools, the Sāṃkhya, Vaiśeṣika, and Naiyāyika, are a little more developed, so many more logical reasons negating them are taught in Dharmakīrti’s seven treatises on valid cognition and other texts.
Were I to lay out those negations here, I’m afraid it would be too much, so I have not written about them. 3.
The purpose of explaining the extremists’ views If you understand these other schools’ ways of propounding eternalism and nihilism well, along with the logical reasons negating them that occur frequently in the texts of the great charioteers, you will, induced by the path of reasoning, gain an irreversible faith in the faultless teaching and teacher of our own Geluk system.
1️⃣ Thus, as Udbhaṭasiddhasvāmin’s Special Praise of the Holy says, However much I contemplate the aspects Of the textual systems of the extremists, By that much more, O Protector, My mind becomes faithful to you.
Moreover, misconceptions will be stopped — holding that suffering is without cause and that it arises from inappropriate causes, maintaining as the path what is not the path, holding as liberation what is not liberation, and so forth.
1️⃣ The seeds of those imprints established in past lives through studying the major texts of debased philosophical systems such as the Lokāyata and others are thereby decreased; and in subsequent lives you will turn away from all wrong views, and the imprints allowing the correct view to arise quickly in your mental continuum will be established.
Not only that, since among the various philosophical systems that spread in Tibet, the standpoints of some appear to be similar to those of the extremist systems, it is most necessary that, understanding well the distinctions among them, you arouse such a strong conviction in Buddhist teachings that your own view cannot stray toward some other view, and so forth.
1️⃣ Thus, those who desire liberation should not think, “these studies are for countering objections in a debate but are not useful for practice.”
1️⃣ Instead they should assiduously study and reflect upon the texts of those great charioteers and the excellent explanations of the father, Jé Lama Tsongkhapa, and his spiritual sons. It is crucial that you understand this.
1️⃣ I say: For anyone here with intelligence, The principal thing to do in mind and body Is to find a way to free yourself from samsaric existence; Otherwise, how are you different from an animal?
Many in this world claim to be teachers, And though many say they’ve presented bondage and freedom, All they’ve done is show, as the path to peace, A method that strengthens the root of cyclic existence.
Whose teaching, for those desiring liberation, Is the supreme and nondeceptive entryway?
1️⃣ Only the Sugata’s teaching, So the Buddha alone is an authority.
If you don’t understand even partially the standpoints of other schools, Then no matter how much you say your own teacher and teaching Are faultless, your words are like a parrot’s: Mere words, incapable of inducing certainty.
1️⃣ Therefore, understanding well the presentations of non-Buddhist systems — Perilous footholds on the edge of debased extremist views — And then rejecting them is the stairway for entry Into the citadel of liberation.
1️⃣ So say the wise.
1️⃣ This has been a brief interlude in verse.
B. The history of the Buddhists The history of the Buddhists is twofold: The history of proponents of the four philosophical systems; and A brief explanation of the points of view of those philosophical systems.
1️⃣ The history of proponents of the four philosophical systems According to the Mahayana, a thousand buddhas will appear in this eon; according to the Hinayana, there will be five hundred.
When the lifespan of the humans of Jambudvīpa degenerated from a measureless lifespan and reached forty thousand years, the Buddha Krakucchanda came.
When the lifespan was at thirty thousand years, the Buddha Kanakamuni came; at twenty thousand years, the Buddha Kāśyapa came; and when the lifespan was at a hundred years, and the five impurities were on the rise, our teacher Śākyamuni came to the world and turned the wheel of Dharma in three stages.
Following the first pronouncement, the Dharma wheel of the four noble truths, there arose the two śrāvaka schools, propounding Hinayana philosophy; and following the middle and last turning arose Madhyamaka and Cittamātra, the two schools propounding Mahayana philosophy.
a. The history of the śrāvaka philosophical systems Vaibhāṣika Of the two śrāvaka schools, the Vaibhāṣikas are known as Vaibhāṣikas because they follow the text called Ocean of Detailed Explanation or Great Detailed Explanation and because they argue in detail that the three times are substantially existent.
1️⃣ They are divided into four basic schools and eighteen sects.
The four basic schools are: The lineage from the preceptor-arhat Kāśyapa, the Mahāsāṃghika school; The lineage from Rāhula, the Sarvāstivāda; The lineage from Kātyāyana, the Sthavira school; And the lineage from Upāli, the Saṃmatīya school.
The eighteen sects: There are five Mahāsāṃghika sects.
1️⃣ Master Vinītadeva says: The Pūrvaśaila, Aparaśaila, and Haimavata; The Lokottaravāda And Prajñaptivāda: these schools Are the five Mahāsāṃghika factions.
1️⃣ There are seven Sarvāstivādin sects.
1️⃣ Vinītadeva says: The Mūlasarvāstivāda and the Kāśyapīya school, The Mahīśāsaka school and the Dharmaguptaka school, The Bahuśrutīya and Tāmraśāṭīya, along with their disciples, And the Vibhajyavāda: these schools Are the Sarvāstivāda.
1️⃣ There are three Sthavira sects.
3️⃣ Vinītadeva says: The Jaitavanīya, the Abhayagirivāsīya, And the Mahāvihāravāsīya: these are the Sthavira.
1️⃣ There are three Saṃmatīya sects.
3️⃣ Vinītadeva says: The Kurukullaka, the Avantaka, And the Vātsīputrīya: these are the schools Of the Saṃmatīya.
1️⃣ Those eighteen sects also were delineated according to the master of whom there were followers, the country of residence, or the standpoint of the philosophical system.
Vinītadeva says: By distinctions of region, topic, and master, there are eighteen different schools.
That is another, different explanation of the way the schools split into eighteen.
One hundred and sixteen years after the Teacher’s nirvana, in the city called Vaiśālī, four elders of the sangha recited the scriptures in four different languages; because of that, the students fell into disagreement and split into the four basic schools.
Through divisions in those, there came to be eighteen sects, which quarreled among themselves.
In time, they obtained the Sutra on the Prophetic Dream of King Krikrī. When they looked into it, they saw its statement that although there would be eighteen sects, the fruit of freedom would not decay, so they came to mutual agreement.
1️⃣ This is still another way of explaining the division.
Masters who were well-known proponents of Vaibhāṣika were: Vasumitra, Dharmatrāta, Buddhadeva, Saṅghabhadra, and others.
Sautrāntika The Sautrāntikas or Dārṣṭāntikas posit their philosophical system by following the sutras and teaching about all dharmas by means of examples: thus are they known by the wise.
Their divisions are two: the followers of scripture, who propound their philosophical system only through accepting literally whatever appears in the sutras; and the followers of reasoning, who follow reasoning as explained in Dharmakīrti’s seven treatises.
Their renowned masters included Kumārarata, Śrīrirata, Bhadantarata, and others.
The history of the Mahayana philosophical systems After the Teacher’s nirvana, the Mahayana teaching was widespread in the regions of the gods and nāgas; it is said to have existed in other worlds as well.
1️⃣ Here in Jambudvīpa, many bodhisattvas were abiding on the various bodhisattva stages, and secret mantra yogins were maintaining secret austerities.
They themselves practiced, and they explained the practices to a few fortunate people, so the Mahayana teaching was maintained and expanded a little, but overall, because the śrāvaka schools were so widespread, the Mahayana teaching was in decline; in this way a long time passed.
By the time the great brahman Saraha came, the Mahayana secret mantra teachings were the main ones propagated.
Then, as prophesied by the Conqueror himself, there came the pair of the second Buddha, Nāgārjuna, along with Asaṅga. Based on the words of the Blessed One himself, they divided the scriptures into definitive and provisional. Since, like the sun, they clearly illuminated the complete way of practicing the profound and extensive paths of the Mahayana, they were known as the two great charioteers.
From that point on, the teaching of the Mahayana became widespread and extensive.
1️⃣ The history of the Madhyamaka philosophical system a Nāgārjuna The protector Nāgārjuna is also the charioteer who opened the way of the Mahayana in general.
According to the Descent to Laṅka Sutra: In the southern region of Vedalī Will arise an illustrious and famous monk By the name of Nāga Who will destroy the positions of existence and nonexistence.
Having clearly explained my vehicle In this world, the unsurpassed vehicle, He will achieve the stage of the Joyous And will go at death to Sukhāvatī.
In addition, Nāgārjuna was clearly prophesied by the Conqueror in many other texts, such as the Mañjuśrī Root Tantra, the Great Drum Sutra, and others.
Nāgārjuna was born into a brahman family four hundred years after the Buddha’s nirvana, in Vidarbha, in the south.
The great brahman Saraha took care of him, ordained him, and prolonged his life — which was not to have exceeded seven days — and then bestowed upon him many instructions on secret mantra.
He was fully ordained by Rāhula, the abbot of Nālandā, and was known as Bhikṣu Śrīmata.
1️⃣ He was put in charge of provisions for the Nālandā sangha; he provided food for the monks by practicing alchemy.
1️⃣ After a śrāvaka partisan named Bhikṣu Ānandakāra wrote a text called the Ornament of Reasoning, Nāgārjuna thrice uttered the great Dharma proclamation, annihilating the refutations of the Mahayana made by this master.
1️⃣ Arriving in the nāga realm, he taught the Dharma to many nāgas, and he brought back to the human world much nāga mud as well as the Perfection of Wisdom in a Hundred Thousand Verses and other sutras that had disappeared from Jambudvīpa; it is for this reason he is known as Nāgārjuna.
1️⃣ Nāgārjuna worked for the benefit of beings in many places, such as Puṇḍaravardhana, Ṣaṭāveṣa, and others.
3️⃣ He went to the northern continent of Uttarakuru and other places, performing countless deeds for the benefit of sentient beings through his magical powers, teaching Dharma, and so forth.
He erected many stupas and temples.
1️⃣ In Bodhgayā he enclosed the Buddha’s enlightenment spot with a stone-lattice fence, and he designed and built the stupa of Śrī Dhānyakaṭaka.
3️⃣ Doing this and other deeds, he left his legacy and brought limitless benefit to the teaching.
1️⃣ In particular, he established the path of the ultimate definitive meaning, that of the profound Madhyamaka, by means of scripture in the Compendium of Sutras and by means of reasoning in the six collections of reasoning, such as the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way.
Moreover, he wrote collections of praises, such as the Praise of the Dharmadhātu and others; texts concerned with secret mantra, such as the Five Stages and the Commentary on the Awakening Mind; and many sutra and tantra commentaries.
1️⃣ And, with logical reasoning, he annihilated the proponents of debased views.
1️⃣ He revived from the ground up the teaching of the Mahayana, which had disappeared, and with a kindness like that of the Conqueror himself, spread the Conqueror’s teaching throughout the land.
Nāgārjuna stayed in the human realm for six hundred years.
1️⃣ At the end of this period, the son of King Sātavāhana, named Śaktimāna, begged for Nāgārjuna’s head, and Nāgārjuna offered it, but the boy could not cut it off with a sword.
1️⃣ Nāgārjuna told the boy that, since he himself had a karmic seed from killing an insect with a blade of kuśa grass, his head could be severed with kuśa grass; thus, the boy severed Nāgārjuna’s head.
1️⃣ He left carrying the head, but a yakṣī stole it and threw it one league away.
1️⃣ Neither Nāgārjuna’s head nor his body have decomposed, and it is related that, after coming closer every year, they will reunite, and Nāgārjuna will again work for the benefit of the teaching and of beings.
1️⃣ The Great Drum Sutra explains that this master is on the seventh bodhisattva stage; the Bright Lamp of Candrakīrti explains that he attained the supreme yogic achievement in this life.
Numerous incomparable sages became his disciples, such as Āryadeva, Aśvaghoṣa, Bhāvaviveka, Buddhapālita, and Candrakīrti.
1️⃣ Because he reopened the chariot-path of Madhyamaka by way of the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way the followers of Nāgārjuna were called Mādhyamikas and Niḥsvabhāvavādins (“Proponents of Essencelessness”).
1️⃣ b) Madhyamaka after Nāgārjuna Āryadeva was taken by Nāgārjuna’s other students to be as authoritative as the master himself.
He wrote the Four Hundred Stanzas, on the practice of yoga.
1️⃣ Although the ultimate meaning of these two, father and son, resides in the Prāsaṅgika system, on the surface their texts do not clearly establish their presentation as uniquely Prāsaṅgika.
1️⃣ Rather they dwell more generally on positions common to both Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika, and so their texts are said to belong to “general Madhyamaka.”
Master Buddhapālita, in his commentary on Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, set forth multiple consequential arguments as the meaning of the logical reasons presented in the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way; he did not explain those reasons with independent syllogisms.
1️⃣ In his Lamp of Wisdom, however, master Bhāvaviveka noted many faults in Buddhapālita’s logic, and giving various reasons why it is necessary to set forth independent syllogisms, he founded the Svātantrika.
1️⃣ Later, master Candrakīrti wrote a treatise, Entering the Middle Way, and a commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, the Clear Words.
1️⃣ Showing in various ways that the faults attributed to Buddhapālita did not apply, criticizing the admission of independent syllogisms, and proving that independent syllogisms should not be admitted, he made it clear that the intention of Ārya Nāgārjuna was Prāsaṅgika.
1️⃣ There are two positions on the identity of the founder of the Prāsaṅgika: some claim it was Buddhapālita and some claim it was Candrakīrti.
1️⃣ Commentators who explain the intention of Ārya Nāgārjuna as solely either Prāsaṅgika or Svātantrika became known as “one-sided Mādhyamikas.”
1️⃣ Master Śāntarakṣita wrote the Ornament of Madhyamaka, master Jñānagarbha wrote Distinguishing the Two Truths, and Kamalaśīla wrote the Light of Madhyamaka.
1️⃣ These three texts are known as the eastern trio of the Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
1️⃣ If one divides the Svātantrikas, there are the Yogācāra Svātantrika Mādhyamikas, who maintain a basic presentation in agreement with that of Cittamātra; and the Sautrāntrika Svātantrika Mādhyamikas, who, like the Sautrāntrikas, admit external objects that are composites of the minutest particles; these are the two types of Svātantrika Mādhyamikas.
2️⃣ The Yogācāra Svātantrikas also are twofold: Mādhyamikas who reject appearances and those who accept appearances.
1️⃣ Masters such as Śāntarakṣita, Kamalaśīla, and Ārya Vimuktisena accept appearances; Haribhadra, Jetāri, and Kambala reject appearances.
1️⃣ The false aspectarians also are twofold: tainted and untainted.
The meaning of Mādhyamikas or Niḥsvabhāvavādins: Mādhyamikas are so called because they admit a middle that is free from the two extremes; they are called Niḥsvabhāvavādins because they propound the idea that dharmas have no truly established essence.
1️⃣ And, as for the meaning of Prasangika Madhyamikas and Svatantrika Madhyamikas: Svatantrikas are denoted as Svatantrikas because they negate true existence based on correct, three-pronged logical reasons that are established independently; Prasangikas are denoted as Prasangikas because they assert that the inferential knowledge in the mind of an opponent that realizes a thesis arises merely through a logical consequence.
1️⃣ The history of the Cittamatra philosophical system: Asanga founded this system.
1️⃣ In the Manjusri Root Tantra, the Buddha says of this very master: Nine hundred years After my final nirvana, A monk named Asanga, Expert in the meanings of treatises, Will clearly distinguish in many ways The definitive sutras from the provisional.
And: In order for the teaching to long remain, Asanga will summarize the actual meaning of the sutras; He will live one hundred and fifty years.
In these and other statements, Asanga was clearly prophesied; it is variously asserted that he came nine hundred years after the Teacher had passed or six hundred years after.
In any case, after the enemies of abhidharma had thrice emerged in India, the teaching declined.
Unable to endure this, a brahman woman named Prakasasilā thought: I will bear sons, and they will cause the teaching to be spread.
From her union with a ksatrya came Asanga; from her union with a brahman came Vasubandhu.
After their birth, their mother had an intelligence-sharpening ritual performed for the two, and when they were older, the two boys asked what work their fathers did.
1️⃣ Their mother said, I did not bear you for following your father's profession but for the purpose of spreading the teaching. Therefore, train your minds and spread the teaching.
1️⃣ Thus, the younger, Vasubandhu, went to the Kashmiri master Saṅghabhadra.
1️⃣ The elder, Asaṅga, thought, "I will spread the teaching after obtaining a vision of Maitreya."
Asaṅga went to a cave on Kukkuṭapāda Mountain. After completing three years of retreat, he had not seen even the slightest sign of Maitreya, so he became depressed.
He went outside the cave and saw an old man whittling an iron post down to a needle by rubbing it with a cotton pad.
2️⃣ He inquired about this, and the old man replied: A person with mental fortitude, Can, with practice, do anything, no matter how hard.
If you do not abandon earnest efforts, Then even mountains can be reduced to dust.
1️⃣ Through this statement, certain conditions were fulfilled, and Asaṅga returned to the cave.
When he went out after completing three more years, he saw a rock being eroded by drops of water, so it occurred to him to persevere, and he returned to the cave. When he went out after completing three more years, he saw a rock being worn away by the feather of a bird, and, as before, he was inspired and returned to the cave.
1️⃣ He completed three more years of retreat and again was depressed that no sign had arisen.
1️⃣ When he went out, he saw a she-dog whose rump was infested with worms and whose torso was chewed up by mange, so great compassion arose in him.
Thinking to clear away the worms by cutting flesh from his own body, he took a golden razor and cut some flesh from his body.
1️⃣ Worrying that the worms would die if they were removed by hand, he thought, "I will shut my eyes and take them off with my tongue." At that moment, he saw it was indeed no dog, but Holy Lord Maitreya, resplendent.
1️⃣ Irritated, Asaṅga said, "No matter how much I practiced, not the slightest sign occurred; Holy Lord, you have little kindness."
The Holy Lord said, "I was there from the beginning; you did not see me because of your obstacles.
Now, since great compassion has arisen, the obstacles are purified, and you can see me."
1️⃣ Asanga then beseeched Maitreya, "Please spread the Mahayana."
Maitreya said, "Grab hold of my robe!" and off they went to Tusita heaven. It is said that Asanga stayed there one god-realm moment, or fifty-three human years.
There, he received from Maitreya the Mother Sutra, the five treatises of Maitreya, and other texts, then returned to the human realm.
1️⃣ Asanga wrote the five treatises on the stages, the two compendiums, and other texts, and founded the way of the Cittamātrins.
1️⃣ It is explained in the Exposition of Praises of the Stages that Master Asanga attained the concentration of continuous Dharma.
It says in the Clear Words of Dharmamitra that even though master Asanga reached the third stage - the Luminous - he taught Cittamātra in order to convert Vasubandhu.
1️⃣ The lord Asvabhāva explains that Asanga abides on the stage of the supreme mundane attainment.
1️⃣ Some state that he lived a hundred years, but it is certain he remained for a hundred and fifty.
1️⃣ Cittamātra after Asanga Initially a Vaibhāṣika, Vasubandhu, Asanga's younger brother, disliked the Mahayana.
1️⃣ He made fun of his older brother, saying, for instance: Alas, for twelve years in the forest Asanga tried to gain concentration; He didn't gain concentration, but he did write An elephant load of works on philosophical systems.
1️⃣ Later, however, after gaining faith in the Mahayana, he received the five treatises of Maitreya and other works from his elder brother.
He then wrote the eight dissertations.
Thus, the five treatises of Maitreya, the five treatises on the stages, the two compendiums, and the eight dissertations came to be known as the twenty Dharma treatises related to Maitreya.
Vasubandhu had four disciples who were more expert than he: Master Dignāga was more expert in valid cognition; Guṇaprabha was more expert in vinaya; Ārya Vimuktisena was more expert in the perfection of wisdom; and Sthiramati was more expert in abhidharma.
It is said that those who followed in maintaining the way founded by Asaṅga are called Cittamātrins or Vijñaptivādins; they are known thus because they propound that all dharmas are merely the self-nature of mind.
There are two divisions: those who assert that the appearance of objects to the sense consciousnesses as gross objects is accurate, and those who assert that appearance as gross objects is inaccurate; these are, respectively, the true-aspectarian and the false-aspectarian Cittamātrins.
1️⃣ The true aspectarians are threefold: proponents of an equal number of subjects and objects, split-eggs, and nonpluralists.
Because the explanations of scholars regarding the particulars of these three are in disagreement, I will not set them forth here.
The false aspectarians are twofold: tainted false aspectarians, who assert that the nature of mind is polluted by the taints of the predispositions of ignorance, and nontainted false aspectarians, who assert that the nature of mind is not polluted.
1️⃣ Cittamātrins are also twofold in another way: those following scripture, and those following logical reasoning.
1️⃣ Respectively, these are those who follow Asaṅga’s five treatises on the stages and those who follow Dharmakīrti’s seven treatises on valid cognition.
Summary of Mahayana Accordingly, through the Madhyamaka and Cittamātra ways founded by Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga, the Mahayana teachings grew and spread like rivers in summertime, and with the successive arrival of countless tens of millions of mighty lords who were scholars and adepts, the Buddha’s teaching was made to shine like the sun.
A brief demonstration of the points of view of the four philosophical systems.
1️⃣ Many different standpoints exist regarding the layout of the basis, path, and result of the philosophical systems of Buddhist schools, but I will not elaborate here.
For were I to set all those out in detail, this book would be too wordy, and besides, they are already extensively explained in other treatises on philosophical systems.
Since the philosophical systems are differentiated by way of view, here I must briefly explain each school’s standpoint.
This is twofold: a. Each system’s standpoint on the object of negation, and b. Each system’s position on coarse and subtle selflessness.
The standpoint of each of the four philosophical systems regarding the object of negation.
1️⃣ There is no difference in any of our schools regarding the admission of dependent arising.
1️⃣ Nevertheless, although proponents of philosophical systems from the Svātantrika Madhyamaka on down do not assert, as non-Buddhists do, a self that is established as a different entity from the physical and mental aggregates, they do posit the aggregates themselves as the self.
1️⃣ Among the Vaibhāṣikas, some Saṃmatīyas posit the collection of the aggregates as the self.
2️⃣ Both the Kashmiri Vaibhāṣikas and the Sautrāntikas posit the continuity of consciousness as an example of the person.
1️⃣ The Cittamātrins posit the mind-basis-of-all Skt. ālayavijñāna as the person. The Svātantrika Mādhyamikas posit the subtle mental consciousness as the person.
1️⃣ The Prāsaṅgika Mādhyamikas disclaim all those positions. Also, the way in which everyone from Vaibhāṣikas to Svātantrika Mādhyamikas posits a self that is the basis for action and its result is through asserting that the person or other entity is established conventionally from its own side.
Not satisfied merely to impute “I” or “person” on the basis of the aggregates, they inquire: “How is the person established?180 As the individual aggregates?
1️⃣ As their collection?
1️⃣ As something other than those?” And, thinking that some suitable example of the person should be found in relation to the aggregates, they posit a conventional self.
Apprehending thusly is designated as “apprehending that which is established from its own side,” and the object of that as “that which is established from its own side.”
1️⃣ These schools think: “If, after seeking through that mode of inquiry, you find no person, then that person cannot be established, and the flaw ensues that the person is annihilated.”
1️⃣ By the same token, you should also know the particulars of the realists’ claims that what is conventionally established is truly established, perfectly established, ultimately established, established in reality, established by its own characteristic, inherently established, essentially established, substantially established, and so forth.
1️⃣ Vaibhāṣika The Vaibhāṣikas hold that, in the final analysis, form, consciousness, and other dharmas are necessarily found.
1️⃣ They hold also that, in the final analysis, the minutest partless particles and a continuum’s briefest partless moments necessarily exist.
2️⃣ Thus Vaibhāṣikas maintain that partless particles are the compositional basis of gross physical forms and partless moments are the components of temporal continuity.
1️⃣ Since, even upon being broken or destroyed, the partless particle and moment, space, and so forth, are not lost to the mind that apprehends them, they are substantially existent, ultimately true, and ultimately existent; phenomena that are lost to the mind apprehending them by being broken or destroyed are imputed existents, conventional existents, and conventional truths.
1️⃣ The Vaibhāṣikas assert that all entities included in the two truths are able to perform a function, and so are substantially established.
Sautrāntika The Sautrāntikas assert that dharmas ultimately able to produce a result are specifically characterized, ultimately true, and established by their own characteristics; dharmas ultimately unable to perform a function are generally characterized, not established by their own characteristics, and conventionally true.
1️⃣ They also assert that, if both generally and specifically characterized phenomena are not established from their own side, they must be nonexistent.
1️⃣ Because they, like the Vaibhāṣikas, admit the minutest partless particles, and so forth, my omniscient guru, Changkya Rölpai Dorjé, says in his Songs on Correct View, “Matter is a many-colored tiger with stripes.”
1️⃣ Cittamātra The Cittamātrins assert that dharmas established from their own side, without being merely imputed by thought, are specifically characterized, established by their own characteristics, and truly established; while dharmas established as mere imputations by thought are the reverse.
2️⃣ They assert both the dependent nature and the thoroughly established nature as truly established, and the imaginary nature as non–truly established.
1️⃣ Therefore, for the Cittamātrins, as for our own Prāsaṅgika-Madhyamaka system, dharmas pertaining to the imaginary nature are asserted as “not established by their own characteristics.”
1️⃣ However, because they assert that anything not established from its own side must be nonexistent, they do accept the meaning of “specifically characterized” according to the Prāsaṅgika Mādhyamikas, even with respect to the imaginary nature.
1️⃣ As it says in Tsongkhapa’s Essence of Excellent Explanation, “Although they do not hold some imaginary bases to exist according to the former sense, as established by their own characteristics, they do hold them according to the latter sense, as established from their own side.”
3️⃣ Cittamātrins do not, as the Vaibhāṣikas and Sautrāntikas do, maintain that gross phenomena are composed of partless particles.
Rather, they assert that composite dharmas of form and so forth arise from the substance of inner consciousness, and also that noncomposites have the same self-nature as the valid cognitions apprehending them, and so assert that apprehended and apprehender are empty of being substantially different, and that there is no independent external object.
Because it is the potential within the preceding consciousness that allows the subsequent consciousness to arise in the aspect of the object, object and subject arise simultaneously as a single substance; that potential is asserted as the objective condition of consciousness.
Although the objective condition will induce a consciousness having the aspect of the object, its apprehension by the thought thinking, "It is that object," depends on applying a sign.
Thus Cittamātrins assert that dharmas are not established by their own characteristics as the referent objects of the thoughts that apprehend them.
1️⃣ Compared to the objectivists, they are very close to the Madhyamaka system.
1️⃣ By establishing the nonexistence of the external object in accord with their own assertions, the Cittamātrins will negate the external objects asserted by the two śrāvaka objectivist schools, but a mere negation of the external objects of the two objectivist schools does not establish those objects as only mental.
You must understand these differences among the upper and lower philosophical systems in every context.
Madhyamaka a) Svātantrika Madhyamaka Although the Svātantrika Mādhyamikas claim dharmas as conventionally established in three ways, namely, established by their own characteristics, inherently established, and essentially established, they do not claim, even conventionally, their establishment in five other ways: truly established, perfectly established, ultimately established, established in reality, established by their own entity.
1️⃣ Schools from the Svātantrika Madhyamaka on down assert that coarse apprehension of a self of persons means apprehending a permanent, partless, independent self, like that asserted by non-Buddhists; subtle apprehension of a self of persons, on the other hand, means apprehending the person as a self-sufficient, substantially existent entity.
1️⃣ The former apprehension is an imputation that only extremists superimpose.
1️⃣ The latter apprehension has two types: (1) the imputed, wherein one thinks that a self-sufficient, substantially existent entity is entailed by fallacious logical reasons, such as those that lead the Vātsīputrīyas to apprehend a self by virtue of their philosophical system, and (2) the innate, which occurs naturally, without relying on philosophical superimposition.
1️⃣ Neither the Vaibhāṣikas nor the Sautrāntikas recognize a selflessness more subtle than that which results from negating the object of this innate apprehension.
1️⃣ Thus the person and aggregates appear as self-sufficient entities with dissimilar characteristics, like a king and his subjects.
1️⃣ Apprehending them as being established as they appear is the mode of apprehension that apprehends the person as a self-sufficient, substantially existent entity.
Having negated the object of that apprehension — that self-sufficient person that is independent of the aggregates — schools from the Svātantrika Madhyamaka on down, with the exception of the Saṃmatīyas, are alike in claiming that the person is a mere imputation based on the aggregates.
The word mere in “mere imputation based on the aggregates”: Having negated a self that is a different entity from the aggregates, these schools are in agreement in claiming that the person exists as a mere imputation.
The mode of imputation based on the aggregates: These schools claim variously that the person is imputed on the basis of the mental consciousness, the mind-basis-of-all, or the continuum of consciousness.
1️⃣ They also say that the person is imputed on the basis of claiming that the individual aggregates are the self, while some Saṃmatīyas say that all five aggregates are the self.
Although schools from the Svātantrikas on down claim that the person is a mere imputation based on the aggregates, they think that if the aggregates are the basis of the imputation of a person, the aggregates necessarily are the person; and they believe that the aggregates are imputed as being the person.
1️⃣ And, after searching for the object on the basis of which one imputes a person, they believe it is findable; so even though they explain that this means imputed existence, their explanation is clearly incomplete.
Svātantrika vis à vis Prāsaṅgika The Prāsaṅgikas say that the basic object of the innate egoistic view is the self that is imputed on the basis of the aggregates; and not only are the aggregates not the self, they claim, not even a single dharma is findable after searching for the imputed object.
1️⃣ Schools from the Svātantrikas on down claim that if such a standpoint were true, admission of dependent arising would be undermined; this is a very important point, but I will not elaborate in detail here.
Both Prasangikas and Svatantrikas agree that the person established is unable to withstand rational analysis, but they disagree both on the boundary between withstanding and not withstanding rational analysis, and on whether, and to what extent, that analysis constitutes ultimate analysis, and so forth.
1️⃣ Unsatisfied with the merely imputed conventional I in such sayings as, "I accumulate this karma; I experience this result," the Prasangikas search for the meaning of the imputed conventionality, asking, "Where is it established?
1️⃣ In the aggregates individually?
1️⃣ In their collection?
2️⃣ In something apart from them?"
1️⃣ They claim that this constitutes an ultimate analysis and that, after you have searched by that mode of inquiry, if you happen to find the basis of analysis, then it is established as able to withstand rational analysis.
The Svatantrikas claim that that kind of reasoning is a source of conventional valid cognition but is not reasoning analyzing the ultimate, and that even if you find something after searching with that mode of inquiry, it still is not established as able to bear rational analysis.
1️⃣ When Svatantrikas search by that mode of inquiry, they find the mental consciousness to be the person, so for them, mental consciousness is posited as the person.
Thus, the Svatantrikas claim that, without dharmas being established "over there" through their appearance to a nondefective mind, when you have analyzed whether or not the object is established from the point of view of its own mode of subsistence, that constitutes an ultimate analysis.
If, after searching via that mode of inquiry, you find the basis of analysis, it is established as able to bear rational analysis.
The realists do not assert that just that mode of inquiry constitutes an ultimate analysis, or that the object sought is able to withstand rational analysis; they do assert, with respect to searching through logical reasoning, that any dharmas that are found — such as noncomposites, the minutest partless particle, or the shortest partless moment — are established as able to bear rational analysis.
Thus, when we analyze a dharma's own way of existing in any system of philosophy, it is very important to know the boundary between a conventional and an ultimate analysis.
The Svātantrikas claim that, without dharmas being established “over there” by virtue of their appearance to a nondefective mind, the apprehension of an object as established from its own side is the subtle apprehension of true existence.
1️⃣ That is twofold: the thoroughly imputed, such as apprehension through philosophical systems like those of the Cittamātrins; and the innate, which is independent of philosophical systems.
Any referent object of both of these is called truly established, perfectly established, ultimately established, and established in reality; any object established as any of those four does not exist even conventionally.
1️⃣ They do claim that any object established by its own characteristics, inherently established, and essentially established is established conventionally; they assert that if objects were not established in that way, you would fall into a nihilistic view.
I have explained above the differences among the realists on whether to assert those eight terms as validly established.
1️⃣ The Mādhyamikas claim that when we see that dharmas have no mode of subsistence aside from that posited on the basis of their appearance to the mind, that is the negation of the object of negation. The Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika systems assert in common that the apprehension of true existence is the cognition that apprehends such an object of negation.
The logical analyses are condensed into two: the most important reasoning negating that object of negation is the sevenfold analysis; abridging that produces the analysis free of apprehending the one and the many.
1️⃣ The latter mode of analysis is better known.
1️⃣ However, with respect to post-meditation, the Svātantrikas assert that dharmas established by their own characteristics are illusion-like, while the Prāsaṅgikas claim that, after negating such qualities as true existence in meditative equipoise, when we later look for anything remaining, we find only a mere name; this is the unique distinction between Svātantrikas and Mādhyamikas.
1️⃣ Accordingly, the schools from the Svātantrikas on down assert that we are freed from samsara through refuting both the innate apprehension of the person as a self-sufficient, substantially existent entity as well as the object of that apprehension.
1️⃣ The Svātantrikas claim that apprehending both dharmas and persons as objects established by their own mode of subsistence, as opposed to their being established through their appearance to the mind, is the subtle apprehension of a self of dharmas and is the knowledge obstacle.
They also claim that we attain omniscience through abandoning the eleven knowledge obstacles — the nine subtle, medium, and coarse obstacles, with the first and last of those nine having two divisions, thus adding two more — through the eleven stages of the path of meditation, from the first bodhisattva stage up to the final continuum.
1️⃣ c) Special features of Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka The view of the object of negation and the way of negation, which are special features of the Prāsaṅgikas: Apprehending an existent that is not merely established through a conventional designation is the subtle apprehension of true existence.
1️⃣ Apprehending as existent the referent object of that — the person not propounded by way of designation and convention — is apprehension of a self of persons.
1️⃣ Apprehending dharmas as existent is the apprehension of a self of dharmas.
1️⃣ It is claimed that both innate apprehensions — of a self of persons and dharmas — are the ignorance that is the root of samsara and are the delusion obstacles.
1️⃣ It is said that recognizing these kinds of innate apprehensions depends on ascertaining well how persons and dharmas are posited conventionally, how they are imputed by thought.
2️⃣ This is a very important point.
1️⃣ The way this system establishes the person: The person is imputed on the basis of the collected aggregates; the phenomenon imputed by that imputation is the person; and the thought that posits the person is the thought that conventionally thinks “I”: this must be understood definitely to be the case.
That mere "I" that is the object of the mind thinking "I" on the basis of the collected aggregates is called "self" or "person"; that exists conventionally and is called "the self that is the basis of action and result."
1️⃣ The threshold for analyzing the ultimate: Prāsaṅgikas claim that, unsatisfied with merely establishing the I, or self, of our own mental continuum through conventional imputation, we search, asking "How is it established?" This is where the analysis begins.
1️⃣ The method of ultimate analysis is observing, for instance, "I sit here.
I see.
I experience.
I remember."
1️⃣ We should be satisfied by these conventional sayings; if, however, we are not satisfied, we analyze and discover that "the I is not my own eyes, ears, and so forth, neither individually nor collectively; nor is the I something other than that.
1️⃣ That is how I am not existent: I don't exist inherently."
1️⃣ Schools from the Svātantrikas on down take the notion of "not inherently existent" to mean entirely nonexistent, and insist that seeing things in that way is nihilistic.
1️⃣ For the Prāsaṅgikas, inherent nonexistence does not mean nonexistence.
2️⃣ Conventional existence serves the function of existence, and the phrase "dependent arising" removes the two extremes.
1️⃣ For while all dharmas are nonexistent inherently, things established by convention are nevertheless admissible.
1️⃣ That is the unique feature of this Prāsaṅgika system.
1️⃣ Thus, the two schools, Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika, have two distinct ways of identifying the object of negation and, because of that, two different demarcations of ultimate analysis.
1️⃣ If you do not clearly ascertain this demarcation, you will have difficultly distinguishing the subtle differences between the Prāsaṅgikas and Svātantrikas.
1️⃣ The standpoint on knowledge obstacles: Prāsaṅgikas claim knowledge obstacles are predispositions to delusion that can no longer produce delusions even when conditions are met, as well as the result of those predispositions, namely, the mere illusion of true existence in deceptive dualistic appearances.
1️⃣ They claim that one attains the gnosis of complete omniscience through abandoning, on the three pure stages, the three types of knowledge obstacles — subtle, medium, and coarse — or the four types of knowledge obstacles that result when the coarse is made twofold.
1️⃣ Although the assertion in this system — that the apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person is the coarse apprehension of the self of persons — is similar to the standpoint of the Svātantrikas and others, nevertheless that innate apprehension of substantial existence that the Svātantrikas and others assert as subtle apprehension of a self, the Prāsaṅgikas claim as imputed.
1️⃣ In the Essence of Excellent Explanation, Tsongkhapa states, “That substantially existent self is the object apprehended by non-Buddhists as an existent person, the inner doer imputed as a separate entity from the aggregates. ”
1️⃣ Thus, in this Prāsaṅgika system, the innate apprehension of substantial existence is not apprehension of the self as having characteristics distinct from those of the aggregates.
1️⃣ Rather, just as a head merchant is not separate from other merchants yet controls them, so the self, not separate from the aggregates, controls the aggregates by having the same nature as the aggregates. Even though the aggregates are established as dependent on the self, the self is not dependent on the aggregates, as a head merchant is not dependent on merchants; it is taught that this is posited as an innate apprehension of self.
1️⃣ Each system’s way of establishing coarse and subtle selflessness Vaibhāṣika The Vaibhāṣikas assert that any established base is necessarily a self of phenomena or dharmas, so they admit no distinction between the coarse and subtle selflessness of dharmas.
1️⃣ They do posit a coarse selflessness of persons — the person’s emptiness of being permanent, partless, and independent — and a subtle selflessness of persons — the person’s emptiness of being self-sufficient and substantially existent.
1️⃣ They equate subtle selflessness and subtle selflessness of persons.
Among the eighteen schools of the Vaibhāṣikas, the five schools of the Saṃmatīya admit a self that is self-sufficient and substantially existent, so they do not consider emptiness to be the subtle selflessness of persons.
1️⃣ The Prāsaṅgikas aside, proponents of the four lower schools — Svātantrikas, Cittamātrins, Sautrāntikas, and Vaibhāṣikas — take similar positions on the coarse and subtle selflessness of persons.
1️⃣ In three systems — Prāsaṅgika, Cittamātra, and Sautrāntika — the subtle selflessness of persons is said to be emptiness.
It is well known that Vaibhāṣikas deny the establishment of the three characteristics and assert that emptiness is nonexistence.
1️⃣ Nevertheless, it says in the eighth chapter of the Treasury of Higher Knowledge, “Signlessness has the aspect of peace;/ Emptiness is emptiness and selflessness,” and we may infer from this that Vaibhāṣikas use the term emptiness for two aspects of the truth of suffering: emptiness and selflessness.
1️⃣ Sautrāntika The Sautrāntikas’ standpoint on the coarse and subtle selflessness of persons and their nonadmission of a selflessness of dharmas are like that of the Vaibhāṣikas.
1️⃣ Of the three characteristics, they assert that dependent phenomena are truly established, and that the other two, imaginary and thoroughly established phenomena, are not truly established.
Objection: “If thoroughly established phenomena — emptinesses — are not truly established, then, since the subtle selflessness of persons is both empty and thoroughly established, the thoroughly established would not be suitable as an appearing object of an uninterrupted path.
1️⃣ Thus, a direct object of knowledge of an uninterrupted path cannot be posited.”
There is no fault, because in this Sautrāntika system, the subtle selflessness of persons is asserted as an indirect object of knowledge of an uninterrupted path of the three vehicles, while the construct, which is devoid of a self of persons, is the appearing object and the direct object of knowledge of that uninterrupted path.
According to the Vaibhāṣikas, if you meditate at the conclusion of the fourth mental absorption with a mind based on an object of meditation that is any of the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths — impermanence and so forth — you traverse the last four paths of the pratyekabuddha and bodhisattva; and, by meditating on any of those sixteen objects of meditation — impermanence and so forth — on the basis of any of the nine uncorrupted stages, you necessarily attain the arhatship of a śrāvaka.
1️⃣ In the Sautrāntika system, the last four paths of all three vehicles necessarily arise for the first time solely through taking as your basic object a construct that is devoid of self, or so I think.
2️⃣ This should be analyzed further.
1️⃣ The three, Cittamātrins, Svātantrikas, and Prāsaṅgikas, assert that there is no indirect object of knowledge of an uninterrupted path; the Cittamātrins and Prāsaṅgikas claim that the direct object of knowledge of that uninterrupted path must be subtle emptiness, while the Svātantrikas posit it as the coarse and subtle selflessness of dharmas and the subtle selflessness of persons.
1️⃣ The Cittamātra position on the subtle and coarse selflessness of persons agrees with that of the Vaibhāṣika and Sautrāntika, with a slight difference.
The Cittamātrins assert that the subtle selflessness of persons is emptiness; and with respect to the selflessness of dharmas, they posit that the subtle selflessness of dharmas is any dharma’s emptiness of being established by its own characteristic as the referent object of the thought apprehending it and emptiness of subject-object duality and emptiness of being an external object.
1️⃣ They also posit that the coarse selflessness of dharmas is a dharma’s emptiness of being an external object that is a collection of the minutest partless particles, while both subtle selflessnesses are posited as emptiness.
1️⃣ Svātantrika Madhyamaka The Yogācāra Svātantrika Madhyamaka standpoint on the coarse and subtle selflessness of persons is also similar to that of the Vaibhāṣikas.
With respect to the selflessness of dharmas, they assert that emptiness of subject-object duality, emptiness of being external objects, and emptiness of existing by their own characteristics, as the referent objects of the thoughts apprehending them, are the coarse selflessness of dharmas; while the lack of true existence that is empty of being truly established, as well as ultimate truth, are the subtle selflessness of dharmas.
Since they assert that all dharmas are established conventionally by their own characteristics, they assert that all dharmas are established merely through appearing to thought or a mind, without maintaining, as Prāsaṅgikas do, that they are merely imputed by thought or merely established by names and signs.
1️⃣ The Sautrāntika Svātantrikas’ position on both the coarse and subtle selflessness of persons and on the subtle selflessness of dharmas is like that of the Yogācāra Svātantrikas, but their position on the coarse selflessness of dharmas is different.
1️⃣ They agree with the Cittamātrins in asserting as the coarse selflessness of phenomena the nonexistence of an external object that is a collection of the minutest partless particles.
They assert that any established base must be both established by its own characteristics as the referent object of the thought apprehending it and also established as an external object.
1️⃣ Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka Prāsaṅgikas claim that the coarse selflessness of persons is the person’s emptiness of being a self-sufficient, substantial existent, while the subtle selflessness of persons is the absence of an inherently established person.
The coarse selflessness of dharmas is the lack of any substantial difference between a gross object composed of partless particles and the valid cognition that apprehends it, while the subtle selflessness of dharmas is the aggregates’ or bases of imputation’s emptiness of being truly existent.
1️⃣ The two subtle selflessnesses are distinguished only by their basis and not by their object of negation.
In the subtle selflessness of persons, the object of negation — true existence — is negated with the person as the basis, while in the subtle selflessness of dharmas, true existence is negated with the aggregates, and so forth, as the basis.
There is no distinction of subtle and coarse in the subtle selflessnesses of either persons or phenomena; both, it is claimed, are the final, ultimate nature.
1️⃣ How proponents of the four philosophical systems avoid the extremes of eternalism and nihilism in each of their own systems The Vaibhāṣikas say they avoid the extreme of eternalism because the cause ceases when the result arises, and avoid the extreme of nihilism because the result arises right after the cause ceases.
1️⃣ The Sautrāntikas assert that they avoid the extreme of nihilism because composites go on without interruption, and avoid the extreme of eternalism because composites are destroyed moment by moment.
1️⃣ The Cittamātrins state that they avoid the extreme of eternalism because the imaginary nature is not truly established, and avoid the extreme of nihilism because the dependent nature is truly established.
The Mādhyamikas claim they are free of the extreme of nihilism because all dharmas exist conventionally, and of the extreme of eternalism because all dharmas do not ultimately exist. So it is taught.
1️⃣ Accordingly, both the Vaibhāṣikas and Sautrāntikas have to claim that the gnosis realizing impermanence is the ultimate middle path.
However, because they definitely must also have abandoned the two extremes based on the definitions of both subtle and coarse selflessness in their respective systems, this statement about gnosis appears to be meant as a loose explanation, or merely as a characterization.
1️⃣ If measured by the Prāsaṅgikas, all our Buddhist schools from Svātantrika on down fall to both extremes — eternalism and nihilism — even while boasting that their own systems admit of a middle that is free of the two extremes of eternalism and nihilism and loudly claim to be “middleists.”
1️⃣ Summary Although there are degrees of superiority and inferiority among those philosophical systems, it is inappropriate to disparage the Hinayana philosophical systems, saying, “The Mahayana philosophical systems are best,” for they also are followers of the Buddha.
1️⃣ Not only that, but as the omniscient Second Dalai Lama, Gendün Gyatso, taught, “The view of each of the lower philosophical systems is a stairway to each of the higher.”
1️⃣ Except for one or two philosophical systems’ admission of their own unique positions, the Buddhist view is as taught in the sutras, in the works of the great charioteers Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga, and in the excellent explanations of the great Jé Tsongkhapa — emptiness of a permanent, single, independent self; selflessness that is empty of being a self-sufficient, substantial existent; reality that is empty of a subject-object divide; ultimate essencelessness, even though all dharmas exist by their own characteristics; and the nonexistence of even the merest particle that is established by its own characteristics, even though all dharmas do exist conventionally.
1️⃣ As for the progressive degrees of selflessness that permit the establishment of all actions and agents of cause and effect and samsara and nirvana: the earlier, lower ones are easier to realize than the later, higher ones, and the earlier are the means to enter the later.
For some people, being shown the views of the lower philosophical systems allows them to gradually be led to the higher views.
If they were shown the higher views at the outset, it would bring more harm than benefit.
1️⃣ The standpoints of the individual non-Buddhist and Buddhist philosophical systems: Since explanations of them occur extensively and in detail in treatises on philosophical systems, I will say nothing more about them here.
1️⃣ Concluding verses I say: Those who are realized know how to distinguish their own teaching from that of others.
They are able to sound the music of wondrous discourse before the learned, And honest people will raise high the banner of their splendid renown. Ah!
1️⃣ Who would not strive to distinguish the principles of the various philosophical systems!
1️⃣ Nevertheless, many past scholars Have already provided This very account, extensively and clearly, So why do what’s already done?
1️⃣ Even if the mass of jewels of newfound eloquence Is heaped up in a pile, it’s like the riches Of wealthy merchants set out in the alleys Of an impoverished city.
2️⃣ What’s the point?
1️⃣ When all the books of excellent explanation by the sages of India and Tibet Are perceived as mere things and sit, like ornaments, On bookshelves deep within houses, in such times Someone like me is little inclined to real effort.
Therefore, in order to indicate here The complete body and limbs of my subject, I have revealed just a few supreme limbs Of the philosophical systems of the Holy Land and am content with that.
1️⃣ These verses are additional.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation of the history of the philosophical systems of the non-Buddhists and our own Buddhist schools in the Holy Land of India.
1️⃣ May all awaken!
II.
The History of Philosophical Systems in Tibet, the Land of Snows This is but a partial account of the marvelous events whereby, through the kindness of those leading Dharma kings, translators, and pandits, The mighty king, the wish-fulfilling gem of the Buddha’s teaching, was brought from the precious continent, the Holy Land, To the country encircled by snowy mountains and worshipped there atop the victory banner Of the people’s faith, releasing a rain of good things conducive to benefit and bliss.
THE HISTORY of philosophical systems in Tibet is fourfold: A. The history of the Buddha’s teaching, B. In particular, the history of the different schools, C. As a supplementary topic, the history of the sutras, tantras, and sciences, and D. In addition, the history of the way of Bön.
1️⃣ A. The history of the Buddha’s teaching in the Land of Snows This is twofold: 1.
The history of the earlier spread of the teaching and 2.
1️⃣ The history of the later spread.
The history of the earlier spread of the teaching For twenty-six generations of kings, from the first king of Tibet, Nyatri Tsenpo through Namri Songtsen, not even the name “Buddha’s teaching” occurred.
1️⃣ However, during the time of Lha Thothori Nyenshal, reputed to be an emanation of Samantabhadra, the Book of the Hundredfold Homage for Amendment of Breaches descended from the sky to the top of the royal palace.
2️⃣ Although its words and meaning were not understood, it was given the name Awesome Secret.
1️⃣ Its worship marks the beginning of the holy Dharma in Tibet.
According to a prophecy in a dream of King Lha Thothori, “in five generations one who knows the meaning of this text will arise.”
1️⃣ So, during the reign of the Dharma king Songtsen Gampo, an emanation of Avalokiteśvara, the minister Thönmi Sambhota was sent to India.
1️⃣ After training to the point of expertise in various sciences, he developed two scripts: the basic vertical script with a headstroke was modeled on the Devanāgari alphabet, and the more horizontal script without a headstroke was modeled on the Vivarta alphabet.
1️⃣ In this way, he blazed the trail for literacy in Tibet.
1️⃣ King Songtsen Gampo arranged to bring the two main objects of worship to Tibet, an Akṣobhya statue and the Jowo, a statue of Śākyamuni.
He erected the great Rasa Trülnang temple and had many Dharma texts translated into Tibetan, including the Flower Ornament Sutra. He thereby paved the way for the teaching.
At the time of the Dharma king Trisong Detsen, said to be an emanation of Mañjughoṣa, many teachers were invited to the capital, like the great preceptor Śāntarakṣita, Master Padmasambhava, and others.
1️⃣ Seven men — Vairocana and six others — took preliminary ordination.
1️⃣ From there, the number of the ordained wearing saffron robes increased.
Many great translators spoke both the Tibetan and Sanskrit languages, such as Khönlu Wangpo Sung, Pagor Vairocana, Master Rinchen Chok, Yeshé Wangpo, the trio of Kawa Paltsek, Chokro Lüi Gyaltsen, Shang Yeshé Dé, and others, so many sutras, tantras, and commentaries were translated.
The great preceptor Śāntarakṣita took responsibility for explaining the holy Dharma from the vinaya right up to the Madhyamaka and made teaching and study widespread.
Master Padmasambhava and others bestowed secret mantra instructions on some qualified students, so some beings became adepts.
Later on, a monk named Heshang Mahāyāna came to Tibet from China.
He said: “Nonvirtuous thoughts forge the bonds of samsara, of course, but so do virtuous thoughts.
Whether gold or iron, our chains still bind us; and since they are the same, we only become free by thinking nothing.”
When he taught that wrong view, the Tibetans all became his followers.
1️⃣ Those maintaining the pure view and conduct taught by the great preceptor bodhisattva Śāntarakṣita and others were few.
In order to root out that debased view, the Dharma king invited the mighty sage, Kamalaśīla, who then defeated Heshang in debate.
1️⃣ After refuting Heshang’s view through reasoning, Kamalaśīla composed his three Stages of Meditation texts, reillumining the pure view and conduct.
1️⃣ In the reign of Lord Tri Ralpachen, the pandit Jinamitra and many other scholars were invited to Tibet.
They translated many holy Dharma texts into Tibetan, and they definitively established all the texts in the new language.
Then Langdarma became king, and the Buddha’s teaching declined in Tibet to the point where nothing remained.
1️⃣ The view during the early spread of the teaching: King Trisong initially spread the rules by saying, “View and conduct must be according to the system of the great preceptor bodhisattva.
1️⃣ Then, after Heshang, he said: "From now on, the view has to be like that of master Nāgārjuna; anyone who acts according to Heshang's system will be punished."
2️⃣ So he proclaimed.
Thus, some pandits maintained the Cittamātra system during the earlier spread of the teaching, but because the system was mainly that of Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla, the Svātantrika-Madhyamaka view was widespread.
The history of the later spread How the later spread occurred: When Langdarma destroyed the teaching, three sages staying at the Palchen Chubo Mountain meditation school escaped and went to lower, or eastern, Tibet.
2️⃣ Lachen Gongpa Rapsal took preliminary ordination then full ordination.
Ten men - Lumé Tsültrim Sherap and others - came from Ü to take the vows from Lachen Gongpa Rapsal.
1️⃣ The ten returned to Ü, where they upheld and propagated the vows.
1️⃣ Thus, the embers of the Buddha's teachings were rekindled from lower Tibet, and once again the teaching began to spread.
1️⃣ As the teaching was gradually propagated, all of Ü and Tsang were filled with sangha, and the explanatory and practical teachings became widespread.
1️⃣ Thus, Lachen Gongpa Rapsal, Lumé, and others were most kind to the denizens of the Land of Snows.
1️⃣ How the teaching was revived from upper, or western, Tibet: During the time of Lha Lama Yeshé Ö, Rinchen Sangpo the Translator was sent to India to study the Dharma.
He became a great scholar, translated many Dharma texts of the sutra and tantra classes, and established their teachings through exposition and study.
2️⃣ At that time, Razi Kargyal had subdued the nāga Kargyal but was enchanted by him, so mistaken Dharma teachings increased, as did perverted tantric conduct by some, but Rinchen Sangpo put a stop to it.
1️⃣ Through his pure teaching, the denizens of the snow mountains were suffused with his kindness.
1️⃣ Gö Lotsāwa Shönu Pal states: "That the tantric teachings were for the most part more widespread during the later spread of the Dharma than during the earlier spread is due solely to the kindness of this translator." It seems this is no exaggeration.
Later in life, he devoted himself only to practice and went at death to the ḍākinī realm.
1️⃣ This great translator's view: He is said to have been a "nonabiding Mādhyamika."
Also, this Lha Lama Yeshé Ö invited from eastern India the sage Dharmapāla, together with the famous trio of his main disciples: Sādhupāla, Guṇapāla, and Prajñāpāla.
1️⃣ Shangshung Gyalwai Sherap received the vows from them.
He subsequently went to Nepal, where the vinaya master Pretakala requested explanation and praxis related to the vinaya.
The lineage from Shangshung's disciples Paljor Sherap, Shangmo Chewa Jangchup Sengé, and others was known as the upper Tibet vinaya lineage.
1️⃣ Moreover, during the time of Lord Lhadé, the great Kashmiri scholar Śākyaśrī was invited to Tibet.
He translated many sutras and treatises and made the teaching flourish.
1️⃣ The vow lineage transmitted from him was called the vow lineage of the great pandit.
1️⃣ The foundation of the Buddha's teaching is the holy Dharma of the vinaya, and so the earlier and later spread of the teaching are defined through the way in which the vow lineage and vinaya observance were spread.
This is just my general summary of how the teaching spread; the topic may be studied in detail in Dharma histories.
1️⃣ Concluding verses From the headwaters of the aroused awakening mind of many superior beings To the land of Tibet, the ground that holds the wealth of students' merits, Descended multiple streams of the pure divine water Of the Buddha's words and teaching, deep and wide and resonant.
This ocean of the Muni's teaching completely filled Tibet, Where the jeweled net of three trainings is arrayed, The thousand-garland waves of scripture and reason roll, And countless scholar-adepts and nāgas play.
2️⃣ E ma!
1️⃣ When I think of the kindness of the successive Dharma kings, Translators, and pandits who came to enact the unfailing marvels Of the Holy Land here in this remote country, I press my palms together at my lotus heart.
The histories of the different schools Thus, through the deeds of the conquerors and their offspring; through the kindness of Dharma kings, translators, and pandits; and by the power of the Tibetan people’s merit, the precious teaching of the Buddha became increasingly widespread in the Land of Snows, such that a multitude of philosophical systems arose there.
1️⃣ There are many different designations for the Tibetan philosophical systems.
Just as with the subsects of the Vaibhāṣika, some Tibetan systems are also named for a place or a master, while other philosophical systems are named for a single instruction requested from a single Indian scholar or adept or for a practice instruction related primarily to the nature of reality.
1️⃣ Thus, it does not seem to be the case that philosophical systems in Tibet are named only for views, as are some philosophical systems propounded in the Holy Land.
For example, many are named for a place, such as Sakya, Jonang, Shangpa, and Drigung; many are named for a master, such as Karmapa and Bulukpa; and some are named for an instruction, such as Kadam, Dzokchen, Chakchen (Mahāmudrā), and Shijé.
When one briefly discusses these in order, there are two parts: The history of other philosophical systems and the history of the Geluk.
1️⃣ The first is sevenfold, discussing the history of the Nyingma, Kadam, Kagyü, Shijé, Sakya, Jonang, and a few minor schools.
The Nyingma Tradition is twofold: Identifying the general boundaries between the old — Nyingma — and new — Sarma — traditions and explaining the history of the Nyingmapas in particular.
Identifying the general boundaries between the old — Nyingma — and new — Sarma — traditions The establishment of old and new does not occur with respect to the sutras; rather, it is established through the way in which the secret mantra teachings spread.
Although there are conflicting ways of explaining it, the best known is this: tantras translated prior to the arrival of Paṇḍita Smṛti are called old secret mantra, while those translated after the coming of the translator Rinchen Sangpo are called new secret mantra.
If that is true, then the Mañjuśrī Root Tantra, translated in Trisong Detsen’s time, would have to be accepted as an old tantra.
1️⃣ Why then did the great trailblazers of the tantric schools regard it as a new tantra? It seems there are grounds for inquiry.
Although the fountainhead of the new secret-mantra translations is identified as the translator Rinchen Sangpo, there were others as well, such as Drokmi, Gö Lotsāwa Khukpa Lhetsé, and Lord Marpa.
1️⃣ At the time when the teaching was on the increase through efforts of Lotön Dorjé Wangchuk, who came at the beginning of the later spread of the teaching, there were three brothers named Paldé, Ödé, and Kyidé, all sons of Lord Tashi Tsekpa Pal.
Tashi Tsekpa Pal was himself the son of Lord Pal Khortsen, who controlled the kingdom in Rulak.
These three requested Lotön to give them a preceptor and master capable of developing the teaching, so he dispatched the preceptor Shākya Shönu and Master Yeshé Tsöndrü to Rulak, where they established a monastic community.
2️⃣ After the preceptor and the master consulted, they advised both Drokmi and Taklo: “Learn the vinaya because it is the basis of the teaching, the perfection of wisdom because it is the essence, and secret mantra because it is the quintessence.”
1️⃣ They then sent them to India.
1️⃣ Taklo mostly went on pilgrimage and did not study much, but Drokmi practiced as advised and became a great scholar.
2️⃣ He helped spread the explanatory and practical teachings of, above all, the mother tantras.
The great translator Rinchen Sangpo explained the perfection of wisdom literature and both mother and father tantras, and, in particular, elucidated the yoga tantras.
1️⃣ Ārya Gö Khukpa propagated the explanation of the Guhyasamāja, mainly the system of Ārya Nāgārjuna.
1️⃣ Lord Marpa extensively propagated the initiations, explanations, and special instructions of the father tantra, the Guhyasamāja, and those of the mother tantras: the Mahāmāyā, the essential mother tantra Hevajra, the quintessential mother tantra Cakrasaṃvara, and the Four Seats Tantra along with its sworn protectors.
1️⃣ Therefore, scholars and adepts filled the land of Tibet and became lords of the teachings of secret mantra.
It is from these great translators that the secret mantra teachings had their beginning.
The history of the Nyingmapas in particular I now will relate the history of the famed ancient translation vehicle Based on the sweet white-lotus speech of oral instructions from the supreme adepts Of the Holy Land, which is undefiled by the beery stench Wafting from the blathering mouths of foolish Tibetan tantrists.
The history of the Nyingmapas in particular is fourfold: 1) Their history, 2) The standpoint of their philosophical system, 3) Analyzing a few aspects of that philosophical system, and 4) A discussion of some later events.
The history of the Nyingma philosophical system a) The age of Padmasambhava First, the Dharma king Songtsen Gampo gave extensive instructions on the generation and completion stages of Greatly Compassionate One and other deities, and there were many practitioners.
1️⃣ All of Ü and Kham prayed to Ārya Avalokiteśvara, and from this time onward, recitation of the six syllables, oṃ ma ṇi pad me hūṃ, became widespread.
Master Kusara, the brahman Śaṃkara, the Nepalese master Śīlamañju, and others were invited from India, and many portions of the tantras were translated.
So it says in the Testament Drawn from a Pillar. Five generations later, King Trisong Detsen invited the great pandit Śāntarakṣita to Tibet.
1️⃣ The preceptor taught the ten virtues and the dharmas of the eighteen sense fields, and instituted the eight-limbed rule.
1️⃣ The powerful local gods did not like this, so the god Nyenchen Thanglha struck Red Mountain with lightning, the god Yarlha Shampo flooded the Pangthang palace in the Yarlung Valley, and the twelve protectresses inflicted many human and animal diseases.
1️⃣ The preceptor Śāntarakṣita had stated that, since there were unruly deities and srin demons in Tibet that first had to be subdued, Master Padmasambhava should be invited.
1️⃣ Accordingly, the king commanded a messenger to do this.
Master Padmasambhava knew this through his clairvoyance; heading from India toward Tibet, he met the messenger on the path and was invited to live in Tibet.
He imposed oaths on all the malevolent gods and srin demons.
1️⃣ He displayed the diamond stride in the sky, and after subduing the earth, he erected the threefold Mingyur Lhüngyi Drup temple at Samyé.
1️⃣ Through the three-aspected yoga he set Lord Trisong Detsen, twenty-five of his subjects, and many qualified students on the way to spiritual ripeness and freedom. Thus there were many adepts in the land.
2️⃣ It is said that Namkhai Nyingpo rode on sunbeams.
1️⃣ Sangyé Yeshé drove a ritual dagger into a rock.
2️⃣ Gyalwa Chökyang thrice sounded the miraculous bray.
1️⃣ Kharchen Tsogyal raised the corpse of a murder victim.
1️⃣ Palgyi Yeshé openly subjugated mother goddesses.
1️⃣ Palgyi Sengé converted gods and srin demons into servants.
1️⃣ Vairocana possessed the eye of gnosis.
1️⃣ The lord King Trisong Detsen achieved the immovable world.
1️⃣ Yudra Nyingpo possessed the supreme realization.
1️⃣ Jñānakumāra displayed magical powers.
1️⃣ Dorjé Düjom was unobstructed like the wind.
1️⃣ Yeshé Yang went to the ḍākinī realm.
1️⃣ The blacksmith Lhapal could hold wild beasts by the neck.
1️⃣ Nanam Yeshé flew in the sky like a bird.
2️⃣ Palgyi Wangchuk killed whenever he raised his ritual dagger.
1️⃣ Denma Tsemang obtained a spell for nonforgetting.
1️⃣ Kawa Paltsek read the minds of others.
Shübu Palseng reversed the course of rivers.
1️⃣ Gyalwai Lodrö turned zombies into gold.
1️⃣ Khyeu Chunglo caught birds in the sky.
2️⃣ Drenpa Namkha herded wild yaks.
Odren Wangchuk swam in water like a fish.
1️⃣ Mathok Rinchen ate boulders for food.
1️⃣ Palgyi Dorjé passed through mountains and rocks without obstruction.
1️⃣ Langdro Könchok shot thunderbolts like arrows.
1️⃣ Gyalwai Jangchup could sit cross-legged in space.
Many other Indian pandits also came, such as the mantra adept Dharmakīrti, Vimalamitra, Buddhaguhya, Śāntigarbha, and others. Dharmakīrti gave initiations into the yoga of the Vajradhātu mandala.
Vimalamitra and other masters gave appropriate instructions to a few qualified students.
1️⃣ They did not give explanations of the great texts of the definition vehicle, for the time was not right, nor did they greatly diffuse secret mantra, because the oaths are exceedingly strict.
Nevertheless, Vairocana, Ma Nyaknup, and others secretly translated the All-Accomplishing King, the Sutra That Gathers Intentions, and the scriptures and special instructions on the practice of the eight-part Net of Illusion Tantra.
The great master Padmasambhava hid many profound teachings in mountains, caves, lakes, and other places as treasures for future students, then went away to the southwest, to Cāmaradvīpa.
Thus, although a few scattered Nyingma secret-mantra Dharma traditions come from the era of King Songtsen Gampo, most are from the time of King Trisong.
These traditions, which come mainly from Master Padmasambhava and those other masters I have just mentioned, are quite numerous.
It would be appropriate at this point to discuss at length the biography of the great master.
However, because there are many disagreements about his life, making it difficult to decide on one version, and because I am afraid of writing too much, I have not laid it out here.
Some say Master Padmasambhava stayed in Tibet only a few months, and that during that time he only converted gods and srin demons and consecrated Samyé Monastery but didn’t teach very much.
They say that after the master went back to India, an extremist impersonated him, wearing a vulture-feather hat on his head and other parts of a costume known nowadays as the Orgyen Sahorma. The claim that when the impersonator came to Tibet he spread various Nyingma teachings is obviously a biased report.
Some also claim that the Nyingma teachings were made up by Guru Chökyi Wangchuk because Chöwang’s costume also was what is nowadays called the Orgyen Sahorma; this is just ignorant babbling — Guru Chökyi Wangchuk is a treasure revealer of a later era, so the time frame doesn’t make sense.
1️⃣ The nine vehicles In the Nyingma system, the presentation is in terms of nine successive vehicles.
The three common vehicles, taught by the emanation body Śākyamuni, are the śrāvaka, the pratyekabuddha, and the bodhisattva vehicles.
The three vehicles of outer secret mantra, taught by the enjoyment body Vajrasattva, are the kriyā, upa, and yoga tantras.
1️⃣ The three unsurpassable vehicles of inner secret mantra, taught by the dharmakāya Samantabhadra, are the generation-stage mahāyoga, the oral transmission–based anuyoga, and Dzokchen atiyoga. These constitute the nine.
Now, as for the outer tantras and inner tantras: It is explained that the outer kriyā, or action, tantras were taught by Śākyamuni himself, while the upa, or performance, tantras and the yoga tantras were taught by Vairocana.
The inner unsurpassable tantras are explained as having been taught by the great Vajradhara in a pure land called Vast Dharma Source.
1️⃣ The unsurpassable vehicle: The primordial protector, the dharmakāya Samantabhadra, spontaneously establishing himself as a perfect enjoyment body, eternally teaches the unsurpassable vehicle effortlessly, spontaneously, free from restriction or partiality, in the four times to bodhisattva students abiding on the pure stages.
1️⃣ An enumeration of teachings such as those is impossible, since they are as extensive as space.
1️⃣ Still, just a few of these have been elucidated in Jambudvīpa by Garap Dorjé, Śrīsiṃha, Jñānasūtra, Vimalamitra, Padmakara, and other tantric masters who gained the supreme yogic achievement.
2️⃣ So it is explained.
1️⃣ Lineages The sequence of lineages is: the meaning lineage of the conquerors, the symbol lineage of the mantra adepts, and the ear-whispered lineage of ordinary persons; these are the basic three.
There also is a division into six lineages if one adds the lineage of prophecies of the special oral tradition, the lineage of the karmically projected treasure, and the lineage of the mind-seal prayer.
If I were to write about them in detail, it would be too much, so I will not elaborate further.
The Nyingma Dharma is evidently divided into three: (1) the long lineage of oral tradition, (2) the short lineage of treasure, and (3) the profound lineage of pure vision.
The long lineage of oral tradition As to how the lineages arose in Tibet: It is said that the oral transmission lineage consists of the triad of sutra, magical net, and mind class: the Sutra that Gathers Intentions, the Net of Illusion, and the mind-side teachings.
1️⃣ The cycle on the essential secret of the Net of Illusion was explained by Vimalamitra to Ma Rinchen Chok, who translated it into Tibetan.
1️⃣ He in turn explained it to Tsukru Rinchen Shönu and Gyiré Chokyong.
Those two explained it to Darjé Palgyi Drakpa and Shang Gyalwai Yönten.
The lineages descending from Shang had a special-instruction lineage, and Darjé propagated it in many places in the three regions, Ü, Tsang, and Kham; the two lineages derived from him became known as the Ü system and the Kham system.
1️⃣ Further, Nyak Jñānakumāra was the disciple of Vimalamitra, and his disciple was the Sogdian Palgyi Yeshé, whose disciple was master Nup Sangyé Yeshé, so this lineage also arises from them.
Nup Sangyé Yeshé had four favorite spiritual sons, So Yeshé Wangchuk and three others; with his holiest spiritual son, Khulungpa Yönten Gyatso, there were five.
The father and son, Nup and Yönten, had as their first disciple Nyang Sherapchok, whose disciple was Surpoché Śākya Jungné.
His disciples were the “four peaks,” with Tsekok making five; and there were the 108 great meditators and others.
The best among the four peaks was Surchung Sherap Drak, or Deshek Gyapopa (1014–74).
1️⃣ His disciples were called the four pillars, the eight beams, the sixteen rafters, the thirty-two roof lathes, the two great meditators, the one great braggart, the two simpletons, the two venerables, and the three useless men.
1️⃣ One spiritual son of Surchung, who was reputed to be an emanation of Vajrapāṇi, was Jé Drophukpa Chenpo Śākya Sengé (1074–1134).
1️⃣ He had twelve disciples: the four fires, the four blacks, and the four teachers.
The best of the four blacks, known as Lharjé Chetön Gyanak (1094–1148), became a sage by studying the Tripiṭaka: Madhyamaka, valid cognition, and so forth.
He came before Drophukpa to debate Gya Tsönseng and defeated him in debate, so Drophukpa was very pleased and gave Chetön Gyanak all the instructions in their entirety.
Chetön also had many good disciples, chiefly the great lama of Wönpo, Yönten Sung, who also had many great disciples.
1️⃣ His heart-son was the holy reincarnate Shikpo Dütsi.
Of Shikpo’s six main disciples, the greatest was Tatön Joyé, who showed great kindness to later generations by writing down all the sayings of his teacher Shikpo.
1️⃣ The tradition passed to Drophukpa’s students, the two Tsangpas Chitön and Nyetön, Tsangnak Öbar, Metön Gönpo, and Lama So, from whom Pakshi Shaka Ö and Tanak Düdül received it; and from Tanak Düdül it passed on to Sur Jampa Sengé.
1️⃣ Yungtön Dorjé Pal and Jamyang Samdrup Dorjé received it from Sur and further propagated it.
1️⃣ It is indisputable that Yungtön Dorjé Pal, whose lifestory is that of a great scholar-adept, was an adept of both new and old tantras.
1️⃣ The Drophukpa disciple lineage from Dangpo Sangyé Gongwala spread widely throughout Kham.
There were many in Drophukpa’s family lineage and disciple lineage with initiations into and explanations of the tantras.
1️⃣ From Denbak, Tsangtö Mangar, and Latö, it spread south, north, and in every direction.
1️⃣ Another member of Drophukpa’s disciple lineage was the man called Kadampa Deshek — his real names were Sherap Sengé and Popa Thayé — who erected a monastery near the banks of the Yangtze River at Pombor on a piece of land shaped like the letter ka.
1️⃣ There, at the famed monastery of Kathok, the tradition spread even more.
1️⃣ That is the context of the main figures in the Net of Illusion tradition.
1️⃣ The Sutra that Gathers Intentions consists of the root tantra, the Sutra that Gathers All Awareness, and the explanatory tantra, the Sutra that Gathers Intentions.
1️⃣ Dhanarakṣita expounded it to the Nepali Dharmabodhi and to Vasudhara.
1️⃣ Those two expounded it to Chetsen Kyé in Throm and Gilgit and translated it.
1️⃣ These three expounded it there to Jetsün Nup Sangyé Yeshé.
1️⃣ From Jetsünpa Khulungpa Yönten Gyatso and others, the lineage eventually descended to Lharjé Ukpa Lungpa, to whom it was given by Lharjé Shangpa and Togar Namkha Lha.
1️⃣ It gradually spread from there.
2️⃣ That is the context of the Sutra that Gathers Intentions.
Once there was a matchless great sage named Rongsom Lotsāwa Chösang, a reincarnation of master Kṛṣṇācārya.
He studied and practiced all three of the sutra-illusion-mind set, and he skillfully instructed others in them; through his activity, they were propagated.
The main practices of the generation stage are known as the eight transmitted precepts.
These are known to include five transworldly classes: Manjuśrī, representing buddha’s body; lotus, representing speech; purity, representing mind; nectar, representing qualities; and dagger, representing deeds.
1️⃣ They also include the three worldly classes of practice: sending invitations to the mother goddesses, uttering the destructive wrathful mantra, and praising and making offerings to worldly deities.
1️⃣ Of these, the practices of Hayagrīva and Vajrakīla were both bestowed by the great master Padmasambhava himself: Hayagrīva upon the king, and Vajrakīla upon Queen Yeshé Tsogyal and Atsara Salé of Dré.
1️⃣ Through them, those practices gradually spread.
1️⃣ The Manjuśrī cycle was explained and propagated by master Śāntigarbha, the pure heart by Hūṃkāra, and the nectar by Vimalamitra.
1️⃣ The mother goddesses and the other worldly deities: Master Padmasambhava converted the ferocious Tibetan gods and dré demons; he initiated them, set them in their pledges, and showed the three types of worldly gods how to practice step by step in order to benefit the world.
1️⃣ These practices are similar in arrangement to the worldly mandala practices of performance tantra.
1️⃣ Dzokchen The heart of the Nyingma Dharma is known as the special instruction on Dzokchen.
1️⃣ It is threefold: the mind class, the expanse class, and the special-instruction class.
Of the eighteen mother and son texts in the mind class, five originated with Vairocana and thirteen with Vimalamitra.
1️⃣ The expanse class also originated from Vimalamitra, while the special-instruction class, known as the heart drop, originated from the same Vairocana.
1️⃣ The mind class On what is known as the mind-side division of Dzokchen: It was requested from Vairocana and Yudra Nyingpo by Nyak Jñānakumāra.
In him, four great streams of oral tradition were united, and from his ten holy students and others, the lineage came eventually to the Sogdian, Sangyé Yeshé.
In addition, Vairocana’s student Pang Sangyé Gönpo explained it to Ba Rakṣita.
1️⃣ From him, the lineage descended to Yazi Darma Sherap and others.
1️⃣ There is also a lineage descending from Vairocana, Queen Dremo, Marpa Sherap Ö, and others.
1️⃣ That is the context of the mind-side teachings.
The expanse class The cycle of the expanse class of Dzokchen: Vairocana expounded to Pang Mipham Gönpo the special instructions of the vajra bridge, basing himself on the shorter Tantra Equal to Space, whose significance is taught by way of nine expanses, and on the Secret Gnosis and other tantras.
1️⃣ The tradition came eventually to Dzeng Dharmabodhi and from him to the quintet of Nyang Dharmasiṃha and four others.
1️⃣ Afterward, it was requested by Ngorjé, Dzeng Jhosé, and others and was propagated widely.
That is the context of the vajra bridge.
The special-instruction class, the heart drop of Dzokchen, which is reputed to be very profound, was taught by the early-spread master Vimalamitra to Lord King Trisong Detsen and Nyang Tingzin Sangpo.
1️⃣ Nyang erected the temple of Urusha and hid the instructions there as treasure.
1️⃣ He expounded the word lineages to Drom Rinchen Bar, who expounded them to Bé Lodrö Wangchuk.
Later, the man known as the elder Dangma Lhüngyal revealed the teachings as treasure and taught them to Chetsün Sengé Wangchuk and Kharak Gomchung.
Chetsün taught the tradition to Nyang Kadampa and hid the teachings in three places as treasures.
1️⃣ The treasures were revealed by Chegom Nakpo of lower Rongnar; Shangpa Repa from Langdro Chepa Tak; and Shang Tashi Dorjé, who was born in Lado, in Nuptso Lingu in Yardrok; the latter even met Chetsün himself.
1️⃣ The tradition passed to Shang’s son Nyibum, and from him to Jober, Trülshik Sengé Gyapa, Melong Dorjé, the tantric master Kumārarāja, and Longchen Rapjampa.
1️⃣ Longchen Rapjampa alone rose to the top rank of scholars among upholders of the Nyingma teaching.
He wrote on a great many topics, including the sciences, the sutras, and the new and old systems of secret mantra.
What is known as the heart drop of the ḍākinīs was received from Vajradhara by Garap Dorjé; he bestowed it on the tantric master Śrīsiṃha.
1️⃣ Master Padmasambhava received it from him and bestowed it on Lady Yeshé Tsogyal.
1️⃣ She hid it as a treasure, and after Pema Ledrel Tsal revealed it, the lineage descended to Gyalsé Lekpa Gyaltsen, the omniscient Rangjung Dorjé, Yungtung Dorjé Pal, and others.
The history of the treasure tradition: For the sake of future students, some authoritative beings like Master Padmasambhava and others hid as treasures many instructions that could aid in the accomplishment of supreme and common yogic achievements. They blessed the treasures so they would not be ruined and entrusted them to the treasure protectors.
1️⃣ They made prayers so that people with a fortunate karmic connection would encounter the treasures.
When it was time for a treasure to be revealed, the way its readiness for revelation was indicated was through a note, put in with the treasure, containing the name and clan of the treasure revealer by whom it would be revealed, along with a signature.
At a time when the place, time, and person all coincided, the treasure would be revealed and propagated to many fortunate persons; thus, it is called the treasure Dharma.
In general, there were treasure Dharmas even in India, and they also exist in other Tibetan philosophical systems.
To argue that all treasure Dharmas are Nyingma Dharmas shows the defect of a narrow education.
Although some reputed treasure revealers were impostors who hid what they concocted themselves and then “revealed” it, there were also definitely a great many pure ones, so it is improper to denigrate all treasures categorically.
1️⃣ Apart from the authoritative treasure revealers, from Sangyé Lama to Dechen Lingpa, who were prominently prophesied in the Injunctions of Padmasambhava, there also were a good many undisputed treasure revealers not directly mentioned in scripture.
1️⃣ Chögyal Wangpo Dé later compiled their names in a single text and wrote the Supplication to the Hundred Treasure Revealers.
1️⃣ The great sages teach that both the persons and the teachings are completely pure.
1️⃣ Among the treasure revealers were Lord Nyang Nyima Öser and Guru Chökyi Wangchuk, who were called the earlier and later treasure revealers, and dubbed the sun and moon of the treasure revealers.
1️⃣ The treasure revealer Drapa Ngönshé Bar established sites, chief among them Drathang.
He revealed many treasures, in particular many texts related to healing, such as the four medical tantras and others, so it is evident that he was very great in both kindness and deeds.
1️⃣ The profound lineage of pure vision.
1️⃣ Some who had attained the rank of adept gained direct visions of the higher deities, who gave them instructions.
1️⃣ This sort of thing occurs within all the philosophical systems, but it seems to have occurred quite often among the Nyingmapas.
1️⃣ The standpoint of the Nyingma philosophical system Consulting the collected writings that expound the standpoint of the Nyingma system in detail is arduous, and so I have not written much.
I relate here briefly their presentation of view and meditation.
Their explanation of the way to travel the path, as found in the Basic Heruka Tantra and other texts, is similar to new mantra schools’ teachings on the six yogas, the five stages, and Lamdré.
Also, some of their explanations of, for instance, the Net of Illusion’s six stages, three stages, and path of liberation, the special instructions on the path of means of the secret drop and other traditions, the natural meditation of the Sutra that Gathers Intentions, the five stages of the eight transmitted precepts, and so forth, are similar to explanations of the new schools.
However, later Nyingmapas do not seem to make those the primary focus of their teaching and study.
1️⃣ View and meditation in Dzokchen What they do value greatly are the view and meditation of Dzokchen.
1️⃣ Dzogchen is this present stain-free awareness, which is clear, empty, and bare.
1️⃣ They give the etymology as follows: It is called "perfection" (dzok) because all dharmas appearing in samsara and nirvana are perfected within this empty awareness, and "great" (chen) because there is no better means to freedom from samsara.
1️⃣ When one analyzes the subdivisions of Dzokchen, there is the mind class, the expanse class, and the special-instruction class.
In the mind class, whatever appears is mind, and since mind itself appears as self-originated gnosis, there is nothing other than self-originated gnosis.
1️⃣ In terms of how it leads to the end of this path, it is a lot like Mahamudra, but the Nyingmapas claim there are great differences in meaning between the two, because Mahamudra practitioners put their emphasis on the object, while mind-class practitioners establish the subject, mind itself, as awareness that is empty and primordially pure.
1️⃣ The expanse class: Since there is no destination apart from the expanse of Samantabhadra, which is the dharmadhatu, the Nyingmapas deny that anything arises separately from the dharmadhatu.
1️⃣ This teaching places great importance on the clear light, so it is a bit like the new schools' teaching of the five stages; its meaning is very different, however.
1️⃣ In the teaching of the five stages, through the technique by which the five winds are bound, you apprehend in its entirety the empty visualized object of meditation, and then, through its subsequent dissolution, you clarify it in the clear light; therefore, there is deliberate activity involved.
1️⃣ Practitioners of the vajra bridge, on the other hand, say that the expanse-class practitioner, in effortless meditative equipoise upon the profound technique that is without reference point, possesses a profound method of achieving the diamond rainbow body through the gnosis uniting profundity and clarity.
1️⃣ They say that earlier tantric masters who entered this path passed directly into the gnosis body.
1️⃣ The special-instruction class: When the gnosis that is a nondual union free from acceptance and rejection transports you to that state in which all dharmas of samsara and nirvana are seen as empty reality itself, then awareness itself, undivided into samsara and nirvana, directly perceives the dharmadhātu as the object.
1️⃣ This ripens into the body of continuous self-awareness and brings about freedom.
1️⃣ This liberation on the spot is like moxibustion applied to the proper spot on the body.
This emphasis on seemingly transcending the path is like that of the six yogas of the new schools, but there is a great difference in meaning: in the six yogas, the technique of binding the five winds in the central channel effects the appearance of the empty body, leading you gradually along a path of great bliss that involves effort.
1️⃣ Here, on the other hand, having severed all analytical thought, you settle directly into the self-luminous ultimate nature; Nyingmapas regard this as especially distinctive.
1️⃣ And because this path also releases the gnosis body into the rainbow body, it is distinctive relative to the practices of the expanse class and other Nyingma traditions.
Here, it is not merely a question of clarifying the coarse three doors into a brilliant subtle body; through bringing to completion the appearances that are coterminous with the dharmadhātu, all three doors, both subtle and coarse, are clarified into the baseless nature of the body and gnosis. So they say.
Other triads Alternatively, they use three terms: originally pure nature, spontaneously present intrinsic nature, and all-pervasive compassion.
They say that the original essence, empty of basis or arising, is the originally pure nature; the unobstructed radiance of emptiness is the spontaneously present nature; and the energy of that — all pure and impure appearances — is the all-pervasive compassion.
They say that the first term refers to the inseparability of awareness and emptiness; the second refers to the inseparability of clarity and emptiness; and the third refers to the inseparability of appearance and emptiness.
1️⃣ They say that the difference between mind and awareness is that mind is incidental conceptual thought that remembers one thing after another and is controlled by ignorance, while awareness, which is not subject to the polluting control of ignorance, is free of elaborating object and subject, and recognizes that it is itself empty in being empty clarity and nonapprehension.
They say that the appearing aspect of mind is samsara while the empty nature of mind is nirvana.
And since from the perspective of one’s own mind’s empty nature there is no cause for distinguishing samsara from nirvana, their outlook is styled “the inseparability of samsara and nirvana.”
The logic that identifies awareness for a gradualist is: Determining that all appearances are mind, determining that mind is empty, and determining the nondual union of awareness and emptiness, we realize plainly that all dharmas are awareness and emptiness.
1️⃣ The logic that identifies awareness for a simultaneist is: Without meditating gradually, and having awareness merely pointed out by the guru, we realize plainly that whatever appears is awareness and emptiness.
1️⃣ The logic that identifies awareness for a transcender is: Even if the union of awareness and emptiness is not plainly manifest in this life, we gain a genuine realization of that in the bardo through the power of our meditation.
2️⃣ In brief, they say, we should spontaneously release ourselves into our own stainless, present awareness, which is empty clarity and nonapprehension, without acting to refute or establish any concept or appearance as abiding or moving, good or bad, while maintaining bare empty awareness.
1️⃣ This is the essence of the way of meditating on Dzokchen, the unsurpassable essence of the thought of the great master Padmasambhava.
1️⃣ The Nyingmapas’ standpoint on the basis, path, and result: They assert that the basis is the original ultimate nature, untouched by the mind of samsara and nirvana and untarnished by confusion — the bare ultimate nature, with no experience of confusion, no experience of realization, unfit to exist as anything or to arise as anything.
1️⃣ They assert that the path is this present awareness, relaxed in meditative equipoise, empty purity free of good thoughts, bad thoughts, and neutral thoughts, abiding as if at the center of luminous space.
They assert that the result is what occurs when all the good qualities of the path become manifest, when the dharmadhātu, after clearing ignorance and confusion on its own, becomes manifest.
1️⃣ After collecting the essentials from the explanations in authentic documents of this system, I have written this presentation of view and meditation in Dzokchen for easy understanding.
Analyzing a few aspects of the Nyingma philosophical system You may wonder whether the Nyingma Dharma system is absolutely pure, absolutely impure, or a mixture.
In such works as the great translator Rinchen Sangpo’s Distinguishing Dharma from Non-Dharma; the letters of Lha Lama Yeshé Ö, Shiwa Ö, Tsami Lotsāwa, and Chak Lotsāwa; the Thorny Plant of Ngok Lawachen; and Sakya Pandita’s Distinguishing the Three Vows, no explicit critique of the Nyingma is found.
1️⃣ Those texts, however, contain general criticisms of impure Dharma systems in Tibet, and it seems that a few passages are directed at the Nyingmapas.
1️⃣ Gö Khukpa Lhetsé and Drigung Palzin set forth many arguments to establish the impurity of Nyingma Dharma, and Shākya Chokden and Karmapa Mikyö Dorjé reiterated them.
There is a text critical of the Nyingma purportedly written by Butön Rinchen Drup, but it does not appear in the indexes of his collected works, and stylistically, it does not convey the feel of that sage’s language; undoubtedly, some fool wrote it and passed it off as Butön’s work.
1️⃣ Also, the translator Rongsom Chösang, Künpang Thukjé Tsöndrü, Karmapa Rangjung Dorjé, the adept Urgyenpa, Chomden Raldri, Tharlo Nyima Gyaltsen, the later Drukpa Pema Karpo, Pawo Tsuklak Trengwa, and other famed scholars of other philosophical systems, as well as some on our own Geluk side, like Khöntön Paljor Lhündrup and the Great Fifth Dalai Lama, have explained the Nyingma system as pure Dharma.
1️⃣ However, many authoritative scholars, like Butön Rinpoché and the conqueror Tsongkhapa and his spiritual sons, have maintained neutrality.
1️⃣ There is a single work said to be written by Gelek Pal Sangpo that proves in numerous verses that the Nyingma is completely pure, but that author is probably some other Gelek Palsang.
1️⃣ As is evident to anyone who examines it, the language is not that of the omniscient Khedrup.
You may wonder, then, which of those you should follow.
The great biography of Jé Lama Tsongkhapa written by Joden Sönam Lhündrup explains that when someone asked if the Dzokchen view was pure or not, Jé answered, “It is pure, but adulterations fabricated by later ignoramuses have entered into it.”
1️⃣ When Lama Rinpoché was requested to write a text to eliminate the adulteration, he replied, “I would like to do that, but right now I’m working on the Commentary on the Guhyasamāja Tantra, Annotations to the Illuminating Lamp, the Discussion of the Condensed Meaning, the Commentary on Cakrasaṃvara, and other texts, so I don’t have time. ”
1️⃣ Also, I have heard from my omniscient lama, Changkya Rölpai Dorjé, that Tsongkhapa’s view is also like that in the biography of Jé Rinpoché composed by Lhula Kachupa.
1️⃣ Therefore, I myself accept the interpretation to the effect that the present-day Dzokchen view is stained by adulteration.
I do not, however, dare to say that the view in and of itself is a wrong view.
Nevertheless, it appears that a view so elevated was meaningful because it was appropriate to the mental continuums of the sharpest students during that wonderful era when the great master Padmasambhava and others came.
I think, however, that in those whose minds are not the least bit distinctive, as in those of present-day ordinary people, a view so elevated might be greatly harmful, and far from beneficial.
1️⃣ As Wöntön Rinchen Gangpa has said: He who does not practice the Dharma appropriate to his mental continuum And pursues the highest vehicle Is like a small child mounting a wild horse; It is very important to practice what is appropriate to one’s mental continuum.
Moreover, even though many impurities are apparent in the Nyingma tantric texts, and in those scriptures that establish view, meditation, and conduct, and the base, path, and result, it is not right to deprecate them for that reason and say they are mistaken Dharma; that would be the same as inappropriately calling tarnished gold brass.
As for impurities, when the intelligent analyze in detail, not only the Nyingma, but all Tibetan philosophical systems appear to have them.
1️⃣ Thus, if you understand well that this is so, you will gain a definite understanding, induced by faultless reasoning, that our tradition, that of the conqueror Jé Tsongkhapa, is the sole entryway used by those intent on liberation.
2️⃣ This is just a brief summary; I will elaborate below.
1️⃣ Thus, the omniscient Butön states in reply to the translator Rinchen Sangpo, Lha Lama Yeshé Ö, Phodrang Shiwa Ö, Gö Khukpa Lhetsé, and others who regarded the early secret mantra translations of Nyingma as impure: My own lamas, the bilingual Nyimai Tsenchen as well as Rikral and others, said that because Sanskrit manuscripts were found at Samyé, and the Sanskrit of Fragments of the Vajrakīla Root Tantra appeared in Nepal, those tantras are pure.
1️⃣ I think that, as it is said: The malevolent, whose minds are naturally flawed, Are mistaken with respect to the form of what is incorrect, Not to mention with respect to things said to be in doubt.
1️⃣ Thus it is good, not bad, if you remain equanimous.
1️⃣ Saying that good dharmas are not good, and saying that those that are not good are good: this is explained as failing to distinguish cause and effect.
Also: Saying that a dharma does or does not have such and such characteristics As distinguished by way of the four causes, when one has neither understood nor seen: This is nefarious hairsplitting; Disparaging the Dharma is rejected in the Muni’s texts.
Just as stated, I will stay neutral.
1️⃣ Thus taught Butön.
A discussion of some later events I have already discussed the many special beings who came earlier and held and propagated the instructions of the oral and treasure transmissions.
I might, though, mention some who came later.
1️⃣ There were five emanations of Master Padmasambhava, those of his body, speech, mind, qualities, and deeds.
1️⃣ The body emanation was Nyang Nyima Öser, the speech emanation was Chöwang, the mind emanation was Ngari Panchen Pema Wangyal, and the emanation of qualities was Wangpo Dé Jangdak Tashi Thopgyal.
1️⃣ It is asserted that his deed emanation will arise later, when the time is right.
Of those, Ngari Panchen combined the qualities of both scholar and adept; his writings on Dharma were many.
1️⃣ Wangpo Dé Jangdak Tashi Thopgyal was his incarnation.
1️⃣ Ngari Panchen’s younger brother was the tantric master Gökyi Demtruchen, or Lekden Düjom Dorjé, the incarnation of Ngödrup Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ Gökyi Demtruchen’s reincarnation was Jangdak Tashi Thopgyal’s son, the tantric master Ngakgi Wangpo.
1️⃣ The latter’s incarnation was the fourth Dorjé Drak trulku, the tantric master Pema Trinlé.
1️⃣ During his time, Jangdak Tashi Thopgyal was at odds with the ruler, Shingshakpa Tseten Dorjé.
1️⃣ Shingshakpa and Jangpa Namkha Gyaltsen formed an alliance, and Tashi Thopa was exiled.
1️⃣ Shingshakpa said with relish: You who are called Power (thop) are a powerless wanderer: I banish you to the region of the city of ghosts.
In reply, Tashi Thopa stated: You who are called Field are replete with tenfold guilt: I will send you into the mouth of Rāhula.
1️⃣ Having said this, he performed the rituals of Yama and Rāhula, killing Shingshakpa and his retinue.
1️⃣ Tashi Thopa had set up a temporary camp for that purpose and named it Evaṃ Chokgar, after the tantric monk named Chokgar who was staying with him.
1️⃣ Later, he started Thupten Dorjé Drak, a monastery in Ü that is still standing.
1️⃣ Chögyal Terdak Lingpa, the incarnation of Dongak Lingpa of the incarnation lineage of Drapa Ngönshé Bar, founded Orgyen Mindröl Ling Monastery.
His younger brother was the great translator Dharmaśrī, who was expert in the sutras, the new and old tantras, and countless worldly sciences, and wrote many treatises.
1️⃣ His highness the Great Fifth Dalai Lama was the body incarnation of Lord Nyang Nyima Öser and met Bhāvaviveka and the Dharma king Indrasena in a pure vision.
1️⃣ The teachings transmitted from him were received in their entirety by Sur Chöying Rangdröl and Tratsangpa Lochok Dorjé, who wrote various literary works about them and practiced, expounded, and propagated them.
The Great Fifth undertook many practices and activities related to the Nyingma system in Nampar Gyalwa Pen Delek Sheling Monastery and erected a multitude of Nyingma monasteries.
Although the Nyingma teaching was widespread at that time, not long afterward, the Jungar Mongol army pillaged the three monasteries, Dorjé Drak, Mindröl Ling, and Namgyal Ling.
2️⃣ Though innocent, the Dordrak trulku, the great translator Dharmaśrī, the great Namgyal scholar Könchok Chödrak, and Terdak Lingpa’s son, Pema Gyurmé Gyatso, were all executed.
On the pretense of purifying Sera, Drepung, and other monasteries, the Jungars expelled many older monks, and in this and other disgraceful deeds, they claimed they were performing a service for the Gelukpas.
1️⃣ Nevertheless, not long afterward, both Dorjé Drak and Mindröl Ling were restored; Namgyal Ling became Geluk.
Later on, the Jedrung trulku, Losang Trinlé, focusing on a treasure text of Terdak Lingpa as well as on the Dharma cycle of the Secret Gnosis, wrote many textbooks that mixed the new and old tantras.
In that way, alcohol rituals and consort rituals spread everywhere, and all the clergy and lay folk who enjoyed the evils of beer followed him.
1️⃣ Some Geluk trulkus and geshés were also involved in that.
Many of the monasteries north and south of the Tsangpo River virtually turned into lay centers.
1️⃣ Our holy supreme leader, Maitri by name, Phurbu Chok Ngawang Jampa, criticized these practices in accordance with the Dharma, and after he eliminated them, the corrupt practices went into dormancy. Now Jedrung Trulku himself had certainly attained a high degree of realization, so his actions may have been intentional and advanced some special purpose.
Superficially, however, because he mixed new and old systems into one, he does not fit into either line.
And those activities were very harmful to pure conduct — the root of the teaching — and likely caused many sentient beings to go to hell.
In Ü and Tsang are two larger monasteries of the Nyingma school, Dorjé Drak and Mindröl Ling, and it seems quite a few smaller monasteries.
1️⃣ In Kham are Kathok, Dzokchen, Shechen, and other monasteries.
1️⃣ In these monasteries the essential Dharmas of the trio of sutra, magical net, and mind class dissolved long ago into the primordial purity of original space, and the Nyingmapas of the present day merely treat as essential such mimicry as chanting from manuals, giving extravagant ritual feasts, and the threefold practice of suppressing enemies, burning offerings, and casting out tormas, as well as other practices.
Concluding verses The sea where the six lineages combine as one, Full of precious treasures of instruction and yogic application, The place where hundreds of thousands of supreme adepts and mighty nāgas play, Is called the ocean of the unsullied early-translation vehicle.
1️⃣ Striving to travel the stages and paths in succession, Not looking elsewhere for buddhahood, Through instructions on transcendence and cutting through, one comes to the greatness Of freeing the corrupted aggregates into a body of light.
1️⃣ Padmasambhava taught it to some with receptive minds, Who, like peacocks, could eat poison for food; It is said that they instantly reached the adept stage, Just like iron transformed to gold by an elixir.
1️⃣ Although the milk of a lioness can be poured Into a precious vessel, it destroys a clay pot; The master himself carefully considered this, and entrusting The holy Dharma to the earth goddess, went off to land of srin demons.
1️⃣ This account, which discusses such events, Is as straight as the center line of a mandala And as pure as the white clouds; I have published it for those with the eye of intelligence.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanations of the history in Tibet of the earlier and later teaching and of the philosophical system of the early translation of secret mantra, that known as the Nyingma.
1️⃣ The Kadam Tradition.
1️⃣ The History of Philosophical Systems in Tibet, the Land of Snows.
1️⃣ The histories of the different schools.
Kadam I now relate the history of the philosophical system known as Kadam, Where thousands of learned and perfected nāgas, Whose essence is the wish-granting jewel of the supreme thought, Played in the great ocean of measureless princely conduct.
THIS BRIEF EXPLANATION of the history of the Kadam philosophical system is threefold: a. The history of the Kadam order, founded through the kindness of the great noble lord Atiśa, b. The history of other teachings and teachers based on him, and c. A general explanation of the Kadam teaching.
1️⃣ The history of the Kadam order, founded through the kindness of the noble lord Etymology Earlier lamas discussed the etymology of Kadam variously, but when Jé Rinpoché asked Chenga Rinchen Pal, “What is the meaning of Kadam?”
Chenga replied, “Without omitting even a single letter na from the word of the Conqueror, one takes it as personal instruction.”
1️⃣ Jé Rinpoché was very pleased and said, “That’s right! That’s right!”
1️⃣ He went to a monastery and said, “Geshé Rinchen Pal has given me a present of the holy Dharma.
What he said is correct.”
Thus, it is called Kadam because the entire content, without exception, of the Buddha’s word — the Tripiṭaka — is included in Atiśa’s instructions on the stages of the path of the three persons so that one can put them into practice.
According to Dromtönpa: The wonderful word is the Tripiṭaka, And any being who counts on the precious golden rosary Of the Kadam, which is beautified by the instruction On the three persons, will find success.
It is as stated in this and other passages.
1️⃣ History How the extraordinary Kadam order arose: It began with the noble lord, the glorious Atiśa.
2️⃣ Dromtönpa Rinpoché blazed the trail for it.
1️⃣ The three brothers — Geshé Potowa, Geshé Chengawa, and Geshé Puchungwa — made it widespread.
1️⃣ From there, Langri Thangpa and Sharawa, as well as Jayülwa and others, extended it.
Atiśa’s qualities Extensive biographies of the noble lord are found elsewhere; this brief account of his greatness is from the Lamp Illuminating Dharma History of the Kadam: He was born as a prince of Sahor in eastern India.
1️⃣ He mastered all the non-Buddhist and Buddhist sciences.
1️⃣ Keeping the three trainings pure, he became an elder, a great vinaya master.
1️⃣ Because he comprehended without confusion the details Of the four basic Vaibhāṣika schools and the eighteen sects, He was honored by all, his speech taken as authoritative.
1️⃣ He headed all the great monastic institutions Of Magadha, such as Vikramaśīla.
1️⃣ He had visions of countless meditational deities, And there was nothing he did not know about the Dharma of the Tripiṭaka and the tantras.
1️⃣ He fully imbibed the nectar of the awakening mind That flowed from the precious vase mouth of Serlingpa.
1️⃣ With the roar of positive and refutational reasoning, He confounded the elephant of base criticism, And he satisfied the fortunate with the holy Dharma In accord with their own way of thinking.
1️⃣ He was called “bodhisattva of the fortunate eon.”
1️⃣ As prophesied by the Lady Tārā, he was enthroned By Nāropa as the very lord of the teaching.
1️⃣ That, then, is Śrīmat Dīpaṃkaraśrī.
How Atiśa came to Tibet How the noble lord himself came to Tibet: The teaching has waxed and waned many times in the Land of Snows.
1️⃣ The way of teaching established by the threesome of the preceptor Śāntarakṣita, Master Padmasambhava, and the Dharma king Trisong Detsen was corrupted by Heshang.
He was defeated by Kamalaśīla, but the pure view and conduct that had become widespread were later destroyed by the evil king Langdarma, and Tibet was a dark land for about seventy years.
1️⃣ Then Lachen Gongpa Rapsal revived the embers of the teaching from lower Tibet, that is, Amdo and Kham, and the great translator Rinchen Sangpo resuscitated them from upper Tibet, that is, Ngari, and there was an increase in the number of monasteries in the districts of Ü and Tsang.
1️⃣ However, some who admired the vinaya deprecated mantra, while others who admired mantra deprecated the vinaya, so the teaching became polarized.
1️⃣ Most people merely bickered about philosophical systems; needless to say, they didn’t know how to put the complete teaching of the Muni into practice.
1️⃣ Even partial understanding became rare.
Especially during the period after Langdarma destroyed the teaching, some tantric yogins wrote down phrases they had memorized from the tantras, but as they had forgotten the intervening text, they simply inserted into the gaps any corrupt tantric language that came to mind.
1️⃣ Likewise, others wrote whatever they wanted in fanciful provincial language and called it “tantra.”
Some tantric yogins would also say to their wives, “Brew me some good beer today, and I’ll write a thick tantric volume.”
From India came the so-called Red Preceptor, Blue-Cloaked Sage, and others, who spread such perverted versions of Dharma as uniting and freeing: sex with women was called “uniting,” and killing sentient beings such as one’s enemies was called “freeing.”
They also spread many types of crude behavior that were designated as “mantra.”
Because of their influence, those who adhered to pure view and conduct were few, while those who pursued perverted Dharma conduct were many.
1️⃣ Even after Lha Lama Yeshé Ö, Phodrang Shiwa Ö, the great translator Rinchen Sangpo, and others wrote and distributed works critical of perverted Dharma, things did not improve.
At that time, the king of Ngari, Lha Lama Yeshé Ö, found it intolerable that the teaching in Tibet had come to such a state; he thought that the only way to improve things would be to invite a great Indian sage who was an authority on the teaching to rectify the situation.
He gave a large quantity of gold to Gya Tsöndrü Sengé and sent him to invite Atiśa, but Gya was unsuccessful.
1️⃣ The king decided to seek additional gold then send someone else to invite Atiśa, but when he went in search of gold, he was captured by the king of the Garlok, who would not release him.
1️⃣ Yeshé Ö’s nephew, Jangchup Ö, obtained a great deal of gold, and though he took it as ransom for his uncle, Yeshé Ö would not hear of turning it over to the Garlok king.
1️⃣ Then, Yeshé Ö was killed by the Garlok.
In accordance with his uncle’s final wishes, Jangchup Ö sent Naktso Lotsāwa Tsültrim Gyalwa to India with a large quantity of gold to invite the pandit.
When Naktso and Gya Tsöndrü Sengé met Atiśa, they reported in detail on the state of the teaching in Tibet and the hardships endured by Yeshé Ö, then requested that he come to Tibet.
1️⃣ Earlier, there had been many prophecies to the noble lord about going to Tibet, but that evening he appealed repeatedly to Lady Tārā.
1️⃣ Examining the signs, she said that there was a ḍākinī he should ask.
Accordingly, he asked the ḍākinī, and she prophesied that if he went to Tibet, it would bring benefit to the teaching, bringing particular benefit through a layman. Thus, he agreed to go to Tibet.
1️⃣ When you know the details of how the teaching waxed and waned and was corrupted, and how for its sake the uncle, Lha Lama Yeshe Ö, his nephew, Jangchup Ö, and the translators underwent great hardships, then you will remember their kindness and recognize how difficult it is to find pure Dharma.
As it is vital you do not enter the Dharma rashly but enter it understanding the distinctions that must be made, it would be fitting to write in greater detail.
1️⃣ But fearing the weight of my text, I have only elaborated in part here; details may be known from other sources.
1️⃣ What Atiśa did in Tibet.
How Atiśa acted on behalf of the teaching after arriving in Tibet: As Tsongkhapa’s Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path says in describing the greatness of the noble lord: When he arrived in Ngari in upper Tibet on account of Lha Lama Jangchup Ö’s request that he purify the Buddha’s teaching, he wrote the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, a text that collects all the key points of sutra and mantra and condenses them into a sequence of practice; through this and other actions, he propagated the teaching.
Also, teaching all the instructions related to sutra and mantra texts to fortunate students for three years in Ngari, nine years in Nyethang, and five years elsewhere in Ü and Tsang, he began anew the teaching traditions that had disappeared, enhanced the traditions that just barely survived, and cleansed away the filthy stain of misconceptions.
2️⃣ In short, he freed the precious teaching from its stains.
If we examine this statement closely, we will find that its main points have many implications.
Atiśa remained in Tibet for seventeen years, and having demonstrated final nirvana in Nyethang on the eighteenth day of the ninth month of the male water horse year at age seventy-three, he came before the holy lord Maitreya in Tuṣita heaven, where he was designated as the bodhisattva Stainless Sky.
1️⃣ Students Although the great noble lord had many disciples in both India and Tibet who became scholars and adepts, the one who was given instruction as from one vessel to another, and was blessed as lord of the teaching, was that emanation of Ārya Avalokiteśvara prophesied to Atiśa himself by Tārā, and prophesied in the Flower Ornament and the White Lotus of Compassion sutras as “the layman who increases Dharma,” namely, Drom Rinpoché Gyalwai Jungné, or Dromtönpa.
1️⃣ If I discussed in detail here the ways in which the precious Dromtönpa blazed the trail of the Kadam, and the three brothers and others further disseminated it, it would be too much; you should study these topics in the Kadam Dharma histories and other texts.
Briefly, as stated in the Lamp Illuminating Dharma History: Then, over the course of up to a decade, Geshé Dromtönpa was leader of the group.
He erected the noble lord’s monastic seat, glorious Radreng, And ripened a circle of utterly pure disciples.
1️⃣ Then, for just over twenty years, The deeds of the three brothers burst forth.
1️⃣ The Kadam sun rose in northern Ü, Filling all the Land of Snows with light.
The great seer Potowa Had disciples whose view and conduct were thoroughly pure: At one time, there were more than two thousand; And Chengawa gathered eight or nine hundred.
1️⃣ Puchungwa did not nurture disciples publicly But ripened countless disciples in a hidden way.
Khampa Lungpa, who taught the Eight-Session Practice, Is said to have gathered eight hundred intent on liberation.
The son nurtured well by the three brothers, Langthangpa, had around a thousand, And the great Geshé Sharawa Gathered together over three thousand whose lives were pure.
1️⃣ Geshé Yagepa had over a thousand, Jayülwa two thousand seven hundred, and so forth; Countless spiritual mentors nurtured students by their deeds.
1️⃣ Right at that time, the diffusion of the teaching was great.
1️⃣ In sum, the Ngari kings Lha Lama, uncle and nephew, who were deeply concerned solely with the teaching, and who underwent great hardships without regard to body, life, wealth, or anything else, invited to Tibet the noble lord, the glorious Atiśa.
Thus, the darkness of misconduct such as crude behavior claimed to be mantra, and of misconceptions such as holding sutra and mantra to be opposed like hot and cold, naturally disappeared when the sun of Atiśa’s teaching rose.
All who maintained the pure view and conduct of the later spread of the teaching, those upholding the lineage of Lachen Gongpa Rapsal and others, entered the oral lineage of the noble lord.
1️⃣ The whole of Ü and Tsang was completely filled with the teaching and the teachers versed in the oral instructions of the noble lord, whose life was pure without and pure within, like the bud of a lotus.
1️⃣ All of Ü and Tsang was covered with monasteries upholding the Kadam Dharma system; those still intact today are Radreng in the north as well as the Narthang Jangchup Chenpo retreat center in Tsang.
1️⃣ Those were prophesied extensively in the Book of Kadam.
Radreng, the pure-land headwaters of the Kadam, arose through the gnostic magic of Dromjé Gyalwai Jungné.
As to Narthang, after it was established by Geshé Sharawa’s student Tumtön Lodrö Drakpa, the lineage of abbots came in an unbroken succession like a rosary of golden mountains.
The other main monasteries mostly emptied out over the course of time, and it seems that most are now occupied by nuns.
1️⃣ The Kadampas very much shunned women, so when a woman who was the emanation of a ḍākinī came to a monastery and was forcibly expelled, she uttered a curse: “Now you have shunned my kind; in the future, the remaining monasteries will be occupied by women.”
1️⃣ Therefore, some holy ones say the current situation came about because of that incident.
The history of other teachings and teachers based on the great noble lord Those known as the Kagyü, Sakya, and Geden also all arose based on the deeds of the noble lord.
When the forefather of the Kagyü, the great translator Marpa of Lhodrak, went to India for the last time, he met the noble lord and received instructions from him.
In particular, the matchless Dakpo Lharjé, or Gampopa, first received the Kadam teaching from Gyayön Dak, a disciple of the great Naljorpa, who was a direct disciple of the noble lord.
Then, after hearing Mahāmudrā teachings from Jetsün Milarepa, Gampopa wrote the Jewel Ornament of Liberation, an instruction on the stages of the path that combined the two rivers of the Kadam and Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ His disciple Dromgön Phakmo Drupa received the Kadam teaching from Geshé Dölpa and also wrote a treatise on the stages of the teaching.
Likewise, Drigung Jikten Gönpo received the Kadam teaching from Geshé Langlungpa, the great Taklung Thangpa received it from Geshé Chekawa, and Karmapa Düsum Khyenpa received it from Geshé Sharawa’s disciple Naljorpa Sherap Dorjé, so they performed all the conduct-side practices according to the Kadam system.
Thus, the essence of the Kagyü Dharma, which is the instructions on Mahāmudrā and the six Dharmas of Nāropa made into Mahayana Dharma, comes only from the Kadam Dharma lineage of special instructions for generating the awakening mind, which are like yeast as a starter for beer.
Jamyang Sakya Pandita received the Kadam teaching from Geshé Chiwo Lhepa, a disciple of Neusurpa, and in his writings he established all the path practices of the common Mahayana solely according to the Kadam system.
Thus, his Sakya followers also practice according to that tradition.
The conqueror, the great Tsongkhapa, is established by authoritative scripture as being in actuality of the same mental continuum as the noble lord.
And, even in terms of common appearances, after he received teachings on the stages of the Kadam path from the two great preceptors Namkha Gyaltsen and Chökyap Sangpo, he gradually, over time, cleared away his remaining stains of incomprehension, misconception, or doubt with respect to the noble lord’s instructions.
1️⃣ He wrote the Great and the Small Treatise on the Stages of the Path and other treatises whose explanatory excellence was unprecedented.
The tradition of Geden Mountain itself is based on the system of the noble lord Kadampa, that is, Atiśa; and though it adds the Madhyamaka view and secret mantra, it is coextensive with the Kadam.
1️⃣ In fact, in Dharma histories, the Geden system is given the name New Kadam.
1️⃣ There is a prophecy about that in the Book of Kadam, in the prophecy of the future in chapter 26 of the Father Teachings: In the end, the embers of the teaching Will be rekindled by one named Drakpa, Who will accomplish the benefit and happiness of many, And his place is a supreme and holy place.
1️⃣ A translator said, “If the name of a limb is a term for the trunk, it is excellent.
It is a system where the limbs extend from the body.”
The verse statement above is prophesying Jé Lama and his monastic seat, Ganden.
The apparent meaning of the statement by the translator is that the New Kadam, or Ganden, which is like a limb, will be more widespread than the Kadam, which is like the body.
Moreover, Sülphuwa wrote a long account of the noble lord, and since he received the Kadam teaching from Geshé Tölungpa, all the many vinaya masters in his lineage were solely Kadampas.
Not only that, but the streams of explanation related to the great definition-vehicle texts also arise from the kindness of the noble lord.
1️⃣ How did that happen?
Here in Tibet, those who mastered completely the Dharmas of Madhyamaka, valid cognition, and the Maitreya literature were the great Ngok Lotsāwa, his disciples, and also their disciples.
Ngok Lotsāwa Lekpai Sherap was not only a direct disciple of the great noble lord, but also was the one heart son who was given the secret Dharma from the Book of Kadam at Yerpa Lhari.
1️⃣ And, when he erected Sangphu Monastery, he did so in accord with a prophecy given him by the noble lord himself.
Loden Sherap, who was both a disciple and nephew of Ngok, wrote the Stages of the Teaching after hearing the noble lord’s Dharma from his uncle.
Then there were Loden Sherap’s disciples: Drolungpa Lodrö Jungné, an expert in all the scriptures; Drechenpo Sherap Bar, an expert in the perfection of wisdom; Gangpa Sheu, an expert in valid cognition; Khyung Rinchen Drakpa, an expert in Madhyamaka; Shang Tsepong, who presided over the actual monastic seat; and others.
1️⃣ When Drolungpa was young, he received the Kadam Dharma from the noble lord and Drom.
1️⃣ He wrote the Explication that Binds Together the Inner Meaning of the One Hundred Minor Dharmas, mainly on the noble lord’s shorter texts, and also wrote two Stages of the Teaching texts, the Great and Small.
1️⃣ The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Teaching is an incomparable commentary on the meaning of Atiśa’s Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, so when the conqueror Tsongkhapa saw this book, he received it with various offerings and composed the Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path mostly to accord with it.
1️⃣ The stream of exposition and study established in many study centers by scholars in the disciple lineage descending from Dro, Dré, Gangpa, Khyung, and Shang eventually went everywhere, like the sky covering the earth, and persists to this day.
In brief, as stated in the Blue Annals of Gö Lotsāwa Shönu Pal: It is evident from most of the biographies of the virtuous friends and yogins of perfect conduct who came to Tibet in later times that they had encountered the various Kadam geshés.
1️⃣ Also, Drom performed deeds whose effects were widespread and long-lasting.
Those facts reveal just a portion of the fruits that arose from Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna turning the Dharma wheel.
As stated, you should understand that all the many pure Dharma systems or philosophical systems of the Land of Snows are the result of the great noble lord turning the wheel of Dharma after coming to Tibet.
A general explanation of the Kadam teaching The general explanation of the Kadam teaching is twofold: The classifications of Dharma and Personal actions and behavior.
The classifications of Dharma Dromtönpa said, “My lama knows how to carry all four corners of the teaching.”
1️⃣ The great Naljorpa Jangchup Rinchen said, “He understands instructions inwardly: this is said not of one who has mastered just a booklet that fits in the palm of the hand but of one who understands all scriptures as instruction.”
Lama Gompa Rinchen said, “There is no oral lineage other than that of my lama, who knows how to enlist the vinaya to assist mantra, and mantra to assist vinaya.”
1️⃣ Thus they have stated.
1️⃣ In general, the special quality of the Kadampas is that they are able to enlist all the scriptures of the Conqueror, without rejecting some and accepting others, as the necessary conditions for an individual’s enlightenment.
1️⃣ Thus, there is no Dharma that is not included in the Kadam.
1️⃣ In common parlance, however, it is twofold — texts and instructions.
1️⃣ Sometimes special instructions are given as a third.
Texts The texts are of three types: those mainly teaching the view, those mainly teaching conduct, and those teaching the two combined.
The first includes Entering the Two Truths, the Instructions on Madhyamaka, and other texts written by the noble lord.
The second includes his Lamp Summarizing Conduct, texts on arousing the mind of awakening, rituals for vows, and so forth.
The third is Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment.
The last is a marvelously excellent explanation that, without discarding even a single letter na from the speech of the Conqueror — the Tripiṭaka and the four classes of tantra, together with the commentaries on their meaning — shows how to condense that into a sequence of individual practice.
As Jé Lama Tsongkhapa states in his Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment: Although the noble lord wrote many texts, the one that is utterly complete, the root, as it were, is the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment.
1️⃣ Because it teaches the key points of both sutra and mantra, it completely covers everything expressible.
1️⃣ Because it gives primacy to the stages of controlling the mind, it is easy to put into practice.
1️⃣ And, because it is adorned by the instructions of the two lamas who were expert in the systems of the two charioteers, it is especially distinctive compared to other systems’ texts.
1️⃣ The works known as the six Kadam texts are: Asaṅga’s Bodhisattva Stages, Maitreya’s Ornament of Mahayana Sutras, Śāntideva’s Compendium of Training and Way of the Bodhisattva, Āryaśūra’s Garland of Birth Stories, and the Collection of Uplifting Verses.
Of those, the Compendium of Training and Way of the Bodhisattva unite view and conduct, while the others are texts that mainly teach the conduct of a bodhisattva.
What is known as One Hundred Minor Dharmas of the noble lord also is a Kadam text, as are Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness, and Precious Garland.
1️⃣ b) Instructions The instructions are also threefold: Instructions mainly teaching the view, Instructions mainly teaching conduct, and Instructions teaching the two combined.
1️⃣ Instructions teaching the view.
1️⃣ The instructions mainly showing the view: These are the noble lord’s special instructions on the guidelines on the four truths in the lineage through Chengawa; the guidelines on dependent arising in the lineage through Puchungwa; and the guidelines on the two truths in the lineage through Naljorpa.
The guidelines on the four truths and dependent arising lead to realization of the ordinary selflessness of persons, while the guidelines on the two truths lead to realization of the very subtle selflessness of dharmas.
The disciple of the noble lord with great expertise in the two truths was the great Naljorpa Jangchup Rinchen.
1️⃣ He taught it to Drolungpa and Chengawa, and Chenga taught it privately to the duo of Tölungpa and Jayülwa.
1️⃣ Tölungpa taught it both ways, privately and publicly, and also wrote many texts.
His student Khyungkham also taught it to many disciples, so it became widespread.
1️⃣ Sangyé Wön also wrote many textbooks about it, both long and condensed.
1️⃣ The Treatise on Philosophical Systems composed by Geshé Chekawa and the commentary on it by Lhalung Wangchuk lay out the standpoints of non-Buddhist and Buddhist philosophical systems, and lead one to the nonabiding great Madhyamaka of Nāgārjuna.
2️⃣ This is a portion of the Kadampa view.
1️⃣ Thus, through the root text and commentaries of the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, and the root text and commentaries of the Instructions on Madhyamaka and other texts, we learn that the great noble lord upheld the Prāsaṅgika-Madhyamaka view.
1️⃣ It also is said that when Dromtönpa offered the noble lord his realization of master Candrakīrti’s system, Atiśa was very pleased, and pressing his palms together at his heart, said, “How wonderful!
1️⃣ Nowadays in eastern India, this is the only view upheld.”
1️⃣ In the texts on stages of the path and the sayings of those known as the three brothers — Geshé Potowa, Geshé Chengawa, and Geshé Puchungwa — we find a Madhyamaka view that is strongly in agreement with the system of Candrakīrti.
1️⃣ Although Ngok Lotsāwa and his students often quoted Bhāvaviveka and Candrakīrti as textual sources, their way of maintaining the view was more strongly in accord with that of father Śāntarakṣita and his spiritual son Kamalaśīla.
The view entailed in some mind training teachings from the lineage of Serlingpa appears to be consistent with the false-aspectarian Cittamātra system.
Still, my omniscient lama, Changkya Rölpai Dorjé, stated, “For the most part, the later Kadampas were rarely able to explain and understand the Indian texts without confusing the meaning.”
1️⃣ Instructions teaching conduct The instructions mainly teaching conduct are the teachings on Mahayana mind training, which are a way to traverse the ten stages and the five paths through generating the still-unarisen awakening mind that cherishes others more than oneself and increasing that which has already arisen.
The sources of these instructions are, in general, the Mahayana sutras, and in particular such sutra-class texts as the Flower Ornament and Unraveling of Intention sutras, Nāgārjuna’s Precious Garland, Wish-Granting Jewel Dream, and Stanzas Satisfying Sentient Beings, and Śāntideva’s Compendium of Training and Way of the Bodhisattva.
The special instructions condensing the essence of those sutras and treatises are found in such instructional writings as: the mind training texts The Weapon Wheel and Destroying the Peacock’s Poison, written by the noble lord’s guru, Dharmarakṣita; the Vajra Songs on Chanting Meditation of Lama Jampai Naljor; the Bodhisattva Stages and Crushing Conceptuality of Serlingpa; and others.
1️⃣ The special instruction on the Seven-Point Mind Training was taught by Serlingpa to the noble lord, who gave it to Geshé Dromtönpa as a private Dharma, and Drom taught it as a private Dharma to the three brothers.
1️⃣ Although the stages of the path was a public Dharma during the time of the three brothers, it is evident that mind training was given only as a private Dharma.
1️⃣ Potowa gave it to Langri Thangpa, Sharawa, and others as a private Dharma.
1️⃣ Langri Thangpa composed an eight-point outline of meditation topics known as the Eight Verses on Mind Training, which he evidently made a public Dharma.
1️⃣ Langri Thangpa taught it to Shang Sharawa, Shang Tsünyen, and Shawo Gangpa.
1️⃣ The text that mixed the teachings of all those was called the Multicolored Booklet; I think it also was known as Shawo Gangpa’s Mind Training.
1️⃣ Shang Sharawa gave the latter as a private Dharma to Chekawa of Ja; there doesn’t seem to be any account of his teaching it to anyone else.
1️⃣ Chekawa practiced it on his own for the most part, but, seeing that it would bring great benefit, rather than giving it as a private Dharma to a couple of students, he taught it publicly in Drephu.
1️⃣ He organized the text into seven divisions: thinking through the basic Dharma, the preparatory practices, training in the awakening mind, the actual practice, changing adverse conditions into the path to enlightenment, the teaching condensed into practice for a single life, the criteria of mind training, the pledges involved in mind training, and how one studies mind training.
1️⃣ He set these out in a root text, which became known as the Seven-Point Mind Training.
1️⃣ The way of meditating on the awakening mind in which one exchanges oneself with others is taught effectively in Kadam texts on the stages of the path to enlightenment, in Langri Thangpa’s Eight Verses on Mind Training, and in Shawo Gangpa’s Mind Training, but the Seven-Point Mind Training’s profound visualizations, such as mounting giving and taking on the breath, are not found in those early texts; and since the Seven-Point Mind Training also is more extensive than those earlier texts in its sequencing of guidelines, it is especially effective.
1️⃣ Also, there is a text by Narthangpa Sangyé Gompa called A Public Explanation of Mind Training whose explanation is arranged in the order found in the root text of Chekawa.
The great Jé Lama Tsongkhapa also recognized the supremacy of the instructions in the Seven-Point Mind Training and taught them extensively to his disciples.
1️⃣ Jangsem Radrengwa took notes on the teaching and, in particular, Hortön Namkha Palwa wrote a most profound text called The Sun Rays of Mind Training.
1️⃣ The eight-session special instruction of Geshé Dromtönpa: Since Khampa Lungpa focused on and expounded it, it was known as Khampa Lungpa’s Eight-Session Mind Training.
1️⃣ The eight sessions are the special instructions on: mind training based on food, mind training based on the breath, emanating as many bodies as there are sands in the Ganges, mind training based on flesh and blood, mind training based on tormas, mind training based on the elements, training the mind to emanate the body as a wish-granting jewel, and the time just before death.
1️⃣ Khampa Lungpa taught them condensed into eight sessions. Kharak Gomchungwa Wangchuk Lodrö taught the Dharma called the three cycles of Kharak.
That instruction combined two rivers into one: from Gönpawa the instruction on the mind-side transmitted from Aro to Bagom, and the noble lord’s mind training instructions, which Kharak had received from Naljorpa and Gönpawa.
The instructions were given the name training in the awakening mind.
Kharak also composed the Seventy Admonitions, which set down in verse the special instructions on the stages of the path.
Moreover, the guidelines on the essence of dependent arising transmitted from Geshé Dromtönpa teach a special way of meditating on great compassion; it is an instruction on conduct, as are the rituals for arousing the awakening mind and for vows, and so forth, composed by Shang Sharawa on the basis of the noble lord’s texts.
The royal instruction that teaches view and conduct combined is known as the “stages of the path to enlightenment for the three persons”; its text is Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment.
Since the various texts and special instructions on view and conduct explained earlier are part of the stages of the path, they all are included among the sources for the stages of the path teaching.
The stages of the path is a complete instruction on the way to practice, as the noble lord combined in a single work the special instructions of both the extensive-training lineage and the profound-view lineage. Thus, it is called the instruction that combines view and conduct.
1️⃣ Those instructions on the stages of the path were taught by the noble lord to Dromtönpa in private.
It is said: Saying to Drom, “I’ve found no one to hand this to but you,” Atiśa handed Geshé Dromtönpa this special instruction and blessed him to be lord of the teaching; it is because of that that the extent of Dromtönpa’s activity was magnified.
Moreover, because Atiśa gave the instruction to Naktso Lotsāwa, there are also stages of the path textbooks in the lineage of Naktso’s student, Laksorwa; and because he gave them to Geshé Sangphuwa, there are the Great and Small Stages of the Teaching, written by the latter’s heart-student, Drolungpa.
1️⃣ Those in the lineage transmitted from father Atiśa and his spiritual son Dromtönpa to Geshé Gönpawa, then Neusurpa and others, and in the lineage transmitted from Dromtön Rinpoché to Geshé Chengawa, then Jayülwa and others, are known as those in the lineage from the upholders of the Kadam special instructions.
1️⃣ Those in the lineage from Drom Rinpoché to Geshé Potowa and then Sharawa and others are designated as Kadam textualists.
The two are similar in meaning and are only differentiated by whether they expound texts in a very elaborate way.
Although these traditions often disagree on the starting point of the path, it is said they arrive at the same endpoint.
Jé Lama used Geshé Potowa’s Blue Udder as a source when he said, “The main idea in all the collections of special instructions is never to give up the holy virtuous friend,” and he guided his students starting from the way to rely on the virtuous friend.
Evidently, there were many texts on the stages of the path written by Kadampas; the two most famous are the Blue Udder and the Dharma Examples.
1️⃣ The former is a commentary by Lhadri Gangpa on Dölpa Sherap Gyatso’s edition of the sayings of Geshé Potowa.
1️⃣ Jé Tsongkhapa praised it, saying, “If you are a geshé, then you should read the Blue Udder,” and he drew on it often as a source in his stages of the path texts.
Dharma Examples has three versions.
1️⃣ The first, by Geshé Drapa, is the short one.
With that as his basis, Geshé Drakarwa added many examples he had heard from Geshé Drapa; his version is the extensive one.
1️⃣ Chegom Dzongpa composed a medium-length version that was easier to understand than the previous two; it was called the Jewel Heap of Dharma Examples.
1️⃣ c) Special instructions When special instructions are added to the aforementioned text and instruction lineages, it makes three.
Although in general there is no contradiction between the instructions and the special instructions, the special instruction that comprises a third category is known as the Book of Kadam, the secret Dharma of the noble lord and his spiritual sons.
1️⃣ That special instruction was given by the great noble lord to the trio of Khutön, Ngok Lotsāwa, and Dromtönpa at his retreat place in the upper reaches of Lhari Nyingpo, in Yerpa.
What is known as the Father Teachings was requested by the father Dromtönpa, and what is known as the Son Teachings was requested by the two sons, Ngok Lotsāwa Lekpai Sherap and Khutön Tsöndrü Yungdrung.
1️⃣ Although at first Khutön had showed disrespect to Dromtönpa Rinpoché, at this time the great Khu crushed the mountain of his own conceit and bowed his head to the feet of Dromtönpa Rinpoché.
1️⃣ This is evident from the Book of Kadam in the verses of praise related to Khutön and to his pure visions.
1️⃣ When he was about to pass into nirvana, the noble lord gave these special instructions to Geshé Dromtönpa, saying, “Give the three — the text, the instructions, and the special instructions — to the three brothers, who are, above all, emanation bodies.”
1️⃣ So, those special instructions were his final advice.
1️⃣ Of the three brothers, Puchungwa possessed the instructions completely, Chengawa possessed most of them, and Potowa just a portion of them.
1️⃣ Master Namkha Rinchen states: Puchungwa Shönu Gyaltsen possessed them completely, Chengawa Tsültrim Bar held most of them, And Potowa Rinchen Salwa was clear only on portions.
Nowadays, only I am left.
1️⃣ This is how the special instructions came to Puchungwa: Ngok Lotsāwa Lekpai Sherap handed them over to Ngaripa Sherap Gyaltsen, and he in turn handed them over to Puchungwa Shönu Gyaltsen.
From him, it descended in stages until it came to Drom Kumāramati.
1️⃣ Up to this point, it had been a word lineage; Drom broke open the word seal and gave it to a few disciples.
1️⃣ After that, the lineage descended in stages, and after the First Dalai Lama, Gendün Drupa, received it from Lochen Thukjé Palwa, it was propagated extensively throughout Ü and Tsang.
The practice of this special instruction is the five recollections.
1️⃣ The root text says: Remember your lama is the object of refuge.
1️⃣ See your body in the nature of the deity.
1️⃣ Make your speech continuously recite the mantra, Think of all beings as your parents, Analyze the empty nature of your mind: By pulling the oars of those five, Purify all the roots of virtue.
1️⃣ The essence of the special instruction is the practice of the sixteen drops.
1️⃣ The qualities of the practice, it is stated, are such that one will become expert in the practice of anything from the vinaya up to the Vajrayana, even in a single session, and that exacting conduct will arise within the context of an elevated view.
The deities are four: Śākyamuni Buddha, Avalokiteśvara, Tārā, and Acala, and the Dharma is the Tripiṭaka: together those are called the sevenfold deities and Dharmas.
1️⃣ You may wonder whether the Kadampas have mantra teachings.
1️⃣ The special instruction on the sixteen drops that I have just explained is the union of sutra and mantra.
1️⃣ Moreover, the arrangement of the Muni’s three pledges — the monastic, bodhisattva, and tantric vows — the cycle of practices of Acala, the fasting ritual based on Ārya Avalokiteśvara, and other practices, were very widespread among the Kadampas.
Many Kadam secret-mantra special-instruction traditions have survived to this day: the text known as the One Hundred Printed at Narthang, in which Chim Jampaiyang compiled a multitude of scattered special instructions of the noble lord, the instructions on Avalokiteśvara given by the noble lord to Geshé Laksorwa, and also guidelines on the four deities and other practices.
1️⃣ The noble lord wanted to teach Saraha’s Treasury of Dohas in order to stop the spread of crude Dharma traditions that were claimed as mantra before the noble lord came to Tibet. Dromtönpa stopped him, however, saying, “This is not appropriate for Tibet.” The early Kadampas were very strict about secret mantra in general and highest yoga tantra in particular.
In actuality, though, the noble lord secretly gave Drom Rinpoché the complete special instructions on the four classes of tantra; and in particular on the ultimate special instructions on the father tantra Guhyasamāja, the mother tantra Cakrasaṃvara, and highest yoga tantra in general, as well the special instructions on the seven adept texts and the three essential works of Saraha.
1️⃣ Thus, the noble Drom was the lord of the complete teaching of sutra and mantra. It is not that the Kadampas do not have secret mantra instructions, therefore, but rather that they do not proclaim them in the marketplace.
1️⃣ This may be understood by looking in detail at the biographies of the individual Kadampas.
1️⃣ Not only that, but secret mantra is also central to the practice of the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, the chief Kadam Dharma teaching.
This is so because it would not be a practice of the complete teaching without it, and because it is directly indicated in the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment’s own words.
1️⃣ One also may understand it on the basis of the statement in the Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, in the section on the special qualities of the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment: “It was taught as a combination of the essential points of both sutra and mantra, so its subject matter is complete.”
1️⃣ A general synopsis of the actions and conduct of subsequent holy Kadam beings.
The general synopsis of the actions and conduct of those holy Kadam beings who came subsequently: According to the Lamp Illuminating Dharma History: The Kadampas’ personal excellence: The short lineage from Geshé Dromtönpa was a lineage of men who were good and stable.
1️⃣ In their equanimity and broad-mindedness, they were not in discord with the values of other philosophical systems or ways of life, yet they did not confuse them.
There was little impurity in their relations with sentient beings, and they had the great thought to benefit all.
1️⃣ They trained by climbing up from below, yet their view was from on high.
1️⃣ In hardship they did not complain, while in happiness their renunciation was even greater.
1️⃣ Their mind training was not all obvious, but it covered a great deal of ground.
1️⃣ Their lives were very simple, yet they were not distracted even when using fine things.
1️⃣ They could be very clearly understood, yet their depth was unfathomable.
1️⃣ They were pleasant companions, yet were not conceited when someone admired them.
1️⃣ They took praise lightly, yet were very weighty.
They used ornate poetry little, relying instead on Dharma language.
1️⃣ They had few arguments or idle words yet established their meaning clearly.
1️⃣ They used few cutting words or insults, and they were expert at conveying meaning to others’ ears.
They did not mix up any of the textual systems and yet taught them to be without contradiction.
1️⃣ They made the Tripiṭaka a support for the special instructions, and they considered the special instructions to be related to the four aspects of the path of conduct.
They did not discuss the flaws in Dharmas or persons, nor did they listen to evil friends.
1️⃣ They did not announce the extent of their knowledge and special instructions but were highly familiar with all objects of knowledge.
They did not take sides with sects and monasteries but were pleased with the faithful.
1️⃣ They knew the lama as buddha and saw friends through their great pure vision.
1️⃣ Their punctiliousness and strictness were great, their grasping or attachment small.
1️⃣ They always reflected when about to act and afterward examined what they had done.
1️⃣ Keeping themselves in a low place, they held sway over countless teachings.
1️⃣ Abandoning debased worldly acts, they trained completely in the Tripiṭaka. Those great beings are as shown above.
1️⃣ Those whose lives were pure like that also are called “the Kadampas of the noble lord,” “those possessing the seven deities and Dharmas,” and the “word lineage of the great Muni.”
1️⃣ Emulating action and conduct like theirs, practice from the depths of your heart.
If you consider those statements in detail, each has major implications.
1️⃣ A synopsis of the actions and conduct of Potowa and his students is also found in the Beautiful Lotus Biography, which is mainly about the actions and conduct of ordinary Kadampas.
1️⃣ Thus, although there are some very marvelous stories, I have not laid them out here, for fear of excess. You should learn about them from Lamp Illuminating Dharma History and other texts, and cultivate faith in them and make them the basis of your aspiration.
1️⃣ Concluding verses In a place far from elaborate thoughts of selfish pursuits, Wearing the Benares cloth of shame and modesty, They sit upon the deerskin pelt of conscientiousness, Legs crossed in the posture of mindfulness and introspection.
At their crown, the three jewels are bound into a topknot; On their body the white Brahmā thread of four deities is worn; From their mouth the secret words of the Tripiṭaka are recited; The vase of their mind is filled with the nectar of the three trainings.
1️⃣ In the hearth of the conventional awakening mind Blazes the ritual fire of the ultimate awakening mind; Into it, the sticks of the self-cherishing attitude and The clarified butter of the egoistic view are offered up for burning.
Hearing the life stories of the host of Kadam sages, Who are clean outside and clean inside like the interior Of a lotus, I relate this, my mind enthralled; Even my tongue, I think, is fortunate.
1️⃣ Since the Kadam is in harmony with all philosophical systems, And thoroughly free of bias and contention, I have held it up as a crown ornament And spoken only briefly about its history.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation of the history of the Kadam philosophical system.
The Kagyü Tradition.
1️⃣ They're drunk on the nectar of the deep definitive meaning, Resting forever without arising, entrance, or elaboration Within the original clear light, the ultimate, basic nature: I now relate the history of the philosophical system known as the Kagyü.
THE HISTORY of the Kagyü is threefold: a. The history of the individual Kagyü lineages, b. A presentation of their views, meditative practices, and so forth, and c. A brief analysis of the latter.
1️⃣ a. The history of the individual Kagyü lineages Origins of the name Kagyü In some later Drukpa Kagyü writings, which only consider that Marpa, Milarepa, and Lingrepa wore white garments, it is written as Kargyü ("white lineage," dkar brgyud), but the consensus is that it is Kagyü ("oral lineage," bka' brgyud).
Since Kagyüpas are upholders of the instruction lineage (gyü) of the special oral (ka) tradition, they are known as such.
History of the Kagyü in general The Kagyü are twofold: upholders of the lineage of Marpa and upholders of the lineage of Khyungpo.
1️⃣ Marpa had the instructions of the special oral tradition that came from Vajradhara through Tilopa (tenth century) and Nāropa (d. How the teachings of the special oral tradition were derived: Tilopa possessed the teachings of the four special oral traditions.
1️⃣ There is the special oral tradition from Vajradhara, King Indrabhūti, the yoginī Lulé Gyurpa, the world-ruler Bhisukalpa, Saraha, Nāgārjuna, and Tilopa, in which the teachings include Guhyasamāja, the Four Seats Tantra, and, of the six Dharmas of Nāropa, the instructions on the illusory body and transference of consciousness.
There is the special oral tradition from Vajradhara, Jñānaḍākinī, Kukkuripa, Caryāpa, and Tilopa, in which the teachings include Mahāmāyā and, of the six Dharmas, the instruction on dreams.
1️⃣ There is the special oral tradition from Vajradhara, Vajrapāṇi, Ḍombi Heruka, Bhinasavajra, Kambala, and Tilopa, in which the teachings include countless mother tantras, such as Cakrasaṃvara, and, of the six Dharmas, the instruction on clear light.
1️⃣ There is the special oral tradition from Vajradhara, Vajrapāṇi, Anaṅgavajra, Padmavajra, Dakima Bhagabhadrī, and Tilopa, in which the teachings include Hevajra and, of the six Dharmas, the instruction on inner heat.
Some slight discrepancies in the identification and ordering of the four special oral traditions are apparent in different sources.
In addition, the scholar-adept Khyungpo had the instructions of the special oral tradition that derives from the two wisdom ḍākinīs and others, so the upholders of that lineage are also declared to be Kagyüpas.
2️⃣ Thus, the Kagyü is twofold: the Shangpa Kagyü and the Dakpo Kagyü.
1️⃣ History of the specific Kagyü lineages a Shangpa Kagyü What is said of its inception The Shangpa Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from the scholar-adept Khyungpo.
1️⃣ A member of the Khyungpo clan, he practiced Bön during his youth.
Displeased with that, he trained in Dzokchen. Unsatisfied even by that, he studied translation in Nepal with Sumati and then went to India, the source of Dharma.
For about fifty years, he traveled back and forth among India, Nepal, and Tibet.
In India and Nepal, he had a hundred and fifty gurus who were scholars and adepts, and he gained an understanding of countless texts and special instructions of both sutra and mantra.
1️⃣ His four ordinary gurus were Mahāvajrāsana, Maitrīpa, Guptayoga, and Rāhula.
1️⃣ The extraordinary gurus were the wisdom ḍākinīs Niguma and Sukhasiddhi.
1️⃣ Those six were his main gurus.
1️⃣ Niguma was the consort of Nāropa. After attaining the rainbow body, she became the leader of an assembly of ḍākinīs and met Khyungpo.
1️⃣ She gave him many instructions, for instance on the initiations into the path of the illusory body, the vajra verses related to the six Dharmas, the stages of the path of Mahāmāyā, and so forth.
1️⃣ Khyungpo also received from Maitrīpa the Dharma cycle of the gnosis protector Mahākāla.
After Khyungpo returned to Tibet, he took full ordination from Langri Thangpa.
When he was staying on Jokpo Mountain in Phenyül, Guru Rāhulaguptavajra brought the Dharma to his doorstep from India, giving him countless instructions, both well known and unknown, on the initiations of the five classes of tantra, the cycles of teaching about the gnosis protector, and so forth.
1️⃣ As prophesied by a ḍākinī, Khyungpo went to Yeru, in Shang province, and within three years he founded monasteries, the chief of which was the monastery of Shongshong.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, the lineage was called the Shangpa Kagyü.
He assembled eighty thousand monks and worked in Shang for the sake of beings for thirty years.
There are many amazing stories about him: he simultaneously manifested bodily forms, passed unobstructed through a rocky mountain, dwelled inside a jar for a week, taught the Dharma while sitting in space, and so forth.
1️⃣ Although his disciples were countless, the main ones were Meutönpa, Yarpo Gyamoché, Ngültön Rinwang, Latö Könchokar, Mokchokpa Rinchen Tsöndrü, and Shangom Chöseng.
1️⃣ A disciple of Mokchokpa’s was Kyergangpa Chökyi Sengé; his disciple was Nyentön Chökyi Sherap, whose disciple was Sangyé Tönpa.
1️⃣ From here on, the lineage is called the lineage of the seven precious lineage members.
1️⃣ Sangyé Tönpa’s disciple Ai Sengé administered the monastic seat.
1️⃣ The Shangpa split into two schools, Jak and Sam, named after the Jak center, which had been founded by Shangtön, and the Samding center, which had been founded by Khetsün Shönu Drup.
Shangtön’s disciple was Gyaltsen Bum, from whose disciple, Jakchen Jampa Pal, the great Lama Jé Tsongkhapa received some of the Shang Dharma.
1️⃣ The omniscient Khedrup Jé received the cycle of the six-armed gnosis protector from Muchen Namkhai Naljorpa, who was in the disciple lineage of Jakpa.
1️⃣ Phagö Künga Sangpo founded Tanak Dorjé Den Monastery.
1️⃣ His spiritual son was Drenchok Dönyö Gyaltsen.
Drenchok’s spiritual son, Jé Künga Gyaltsen — the spiritual father of the Second Dalai Lama, Gendün Gyatso — as well as the later great adept known as Thangtong Gyalpo were also upholders of the Shang Dharma lineage, so it is clear that the Shang Dharma spread in the Chakzam area as well.
1️⃣ The principal Shang Dharmas are: the initiations of each of the five classes of tantras: Cakrasaṃvara, Hevajra, Mahāmāyā, Guhyasamāja, and Vajrabhairava; the initiation of vow; the illusory body of Maheśvarī: the five ḍākinī oral traditions; the six Dharmas of Niguma; the stages of the path of Mahāmāyā; the miraculous wheel of immortality; the cycle of Sukhasiddhi’s transformation practice, and so forth; the amulet-box Mahāmudrā; the Dharma cycle of the gnosis protector; the five deities of Cakrasaṃvara; the secret practice of Vajravārahī; the initiation traditions of Avalokiteśvara, Visphoṭaka, Vajrapāṇi, Acala, and others; and the Kyergang-system practices of Avalokiteśvara, Hayagrīva, and others.
2️⃣ These are quite common in all philosophical systems.
1️⃣ The so-called amulet-box Mahāmudrā is the instruction on manifesting clear light through meditating on bliss and emptiness as inseparable, like the joined halves of an amulet box.
1️⃣ In its key points, it seems the same as the Mahāmudrā of the Dakpo Kagyü.
Since no major works written by the scholar-adept Khyungpo are extant, I do not know in detail how he posited his view.
In a sadhana on the inseparability of the lama and the protector Mahakala, however, such phrases as "realization has arisen when one has cut the cord of thought as though severing a tree trunk at the root," "worldly appearances free themselves," and "there is nothing to be thought," and others, seem similar to the language of Dakpo Mahamudra practitioners.
1️⃣ Dakpo Kagyu The Dakpo Kagyu arose from Marpa Lotsawa Chokyi Lodro.
Initially, he studied translation with Drokmi.
Later, he went to India three times and to Nepal four times.
1️⃣ He met gurus who were scholars and adepts: the great pandit Naropa, Lord Maitripa, the glorious Jnanagarbha, the great adept Shantibhadra, and others.
1️⃣ He trained in detail in the explanations and special instructions, as well as the praxis related to the yogas of the father and mother tantras, such as Guhyasamaja and others.
1️⃣ Through his reliance on Maitripa, he gained an ultimate realization of Mahamudra.
When he returned to Tibet, he developed many disciples, the chief of whom were known as the four great pillars: Ngokton Choku Dorje, Tsurton Wange, Meton Tsönpo, and Milarepa.
The special oral tradition of the stream of explanation went to three of those, Me, Ngok, and Tsur, so those who came successively in that disciple lineage spread and propagated widely the explanations of the initiations and tantras of Guhyasamaja, Cakrasamvara, Hevajra, the Four Seats, Mahamaya, and others.
The explanation of the initiation and tantra of Guhyasamaja from the lineage of Tsurton Wangi Dorje passed down to the omniscient Buton and the great conqueror Tsongkhapa.
1️⃣ The special oral tradition of practice went to Milarepa.
1️⃣ He was born in Gungthang, in Ngari.
1️⃣ His father died early on, and his uncle and aunt made him miserable. Becoming disconsolate, he studied magic and slew many enemies.
1️⃣ Subsequently, he repented of his sinfulness and went to Marpa, who withheld the Dharma for a while in order to purify Mila’s sins, making him undergo many hardships, such as building towers and other labors.
In the end, Marpa fully bestowed the initiations and instructions Mila sought. Meditating with fierce dedication and hardship, Mila immediately gained the supreme yogic achievement in that very life.
1️⃣ His adept-disciples wore simple cotton clothes and came like flocks of birds in flight.
1️⃣ The two main ones were the sun-like Dakpo Lharjé and the moon-like Rechungpa.
1️⃣ On the first of his two trips to India, Rechungpa received from the guru Balacandra the instructions on the wrathful Vajrapāṇi with the lower body of a garuda.
Later, Jetsün Milarepa said to him, “Marpa brought five of the nine existing Dharma cycles of the formless ḍākinī; go and bring the remaining four.”
So Rechungpa went back to India and requested the teachings from Tiphupa, who was a direct disciple of both Nāropa and Maitrīpa.
He received many instructions and offered them to his lama Mila back in Tibet.
1️⃣ Mila gave them to Ngamzong Tönpa, and the latter wrote various texts.
1️⃣ The teachings extending from him are called the Cakrasaṃvara ear-whispered lineage; those extending to others from Rechungpa himself are known as the Rechung ear-whispered lineage.
Mila’s sun-like disciple was Dakpo Lharjé.
It is said that in a previous life he was the youth Candraprabha, who asked the Blessed One for the King of Concentration Sutra.
In this later life, he studied medicine as a youth and became expert in it, so he came to be known as “the physician” (lharjé).
1️⃣ He took a wife, but his wife died when he was only in his twenties; sad at heart, he took full ordination from the Kadam geshé Shawa Lingpa.
1️⃣ He received many Kadam Dharma teachings from Jayülwa, Nyukrumpa, and Chakri Gongkhawa.
When he heard of Jé Milarepa, he was captivated; he went to meet him, and Mila happily cared for him. He was given all the instructions in their entirety, and when he meditated, he gained extraordinary realizations.
Combining the instructions on the Kadam stages of the path and Mila’s Mahāmudrā, he wrote the Jewel Ornament of Liberation.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, the two rivers of Kadam and Mahāmudrā mingled together.
1️⃣ He guided his disciples through the graduated guideline called the yoga of the coemergent Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ The lives of the trio of Marpa, Mila, and Gampopa Dakpo Lharjé are beyond imagining, so I have written of them but briefly; more may be learned about them elsewhere.
1️⃣ The followers of the peerless Dakpo Lharjé are called the Dakpo Kagyü.
1️⃣ If one analyzes that by way of its internal divisions, one sees that its individual sections are the Karma Kagyü, and also the Phakdru, Tsalpa, Drigung, Drukpa, Taklung, Barom, Yasang, and Trophu Kagyü.
1️⃣ The Karma Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from the disciple of the peerless Dakpo Lharjé known as Karmapa Düsum Khyenpa, or Khampa Usé.
He took preliminary ordination at the age of sixteen from Trewo Chokgi Lama.
He received instructions of the noble lord Atiśa’s lineage from the noble lord’s disciple Yöl Chöwang and others.
At the age of nineteen, he went to Ü and received teachings on the Maitreya texts, Madhyamaka, and valid cognition from Tölung Gyamarwa and Chapa Chökyi Sengé, studying them until he became expert.
1️⃣ He received teachings on the Kadam stages of the path from Sharawa and Madhyamaka from Patsap Lotsāwa.
1️⃣ He received full ordination from Mal Dülzin and studied vinaya with him.
1️⃣ At the age of thirty-three, he met Dakpo Lharjé and ceased obscuring the essential meaning with superimpositions.
In Loro, he met Rechungpa and received as many teachings as possible about Nāropa’s and Maitrīpa’s instructions on the six Dharmas and other practices.
Moreover, he pondered numerous instructions from many gurus.
He practiced in many solitary places and thereby reached a high level of achievement.
1️⃣ Later, he founded the monastery of Karma Lhadeng, so he was called “Karmapa.”
1️⃣ He also founded the monastery of Tsurphu.
He was said to be an emanation of the sixth buddha of the fortunate eon, Siṃha.
1️⃣ His disciple was Sangyé Rechen, whose disciples were Bomdrakpa and others.
Although some say the Black Hat sect is so called because Düsum Khyenpa wore a black hat, in fact it was only after the Mongol king offered Karma Pakshi a black official hat that the line of reincarnations became known as Black Hat.
Nowadays, the king’s ministers are distinguished as to high and low office by the tops of their hats; it is a new custom, from the time of the great emperor of the Qing dynasty. However, in the time of the Mongolian and Chinese empires, rank was distinguished by the shape of the hat.
Apparently, because of the tradition of offering a black hat with gold embroidery on the front to honored imperial preceptors, the Yunglo emperor offered such a hat to Jamchen Chöjé and others.
1️⃣ The Karmapas claim that their black hat was made from the hair of a million ḍākinīs, who offered it to Düsum Khyenpa. They make many proclamations of its greatness, but I suspect these reports are exaggerated.
By the same token, since the official hat given to Tokden Drakpa Sengé was red, it is obvious why his lineage is called the Red Hat.
1️⃣ Karma Pakshi was a disciple of Bomdrakpa.
1️⃣ Some say he was a reincarnation of Düsum Khyenpa, but in no reliable history does he appear as a rebirth of Düsum, although he is reputed to be an emanation of Saraha.
Nevertheless, when the Karmapa line was reckoned, he was made the second. Pakshi is Mongolian for “master,” so Karma Pakshi became known thus when he went to Mongolia. His official title was actually Chökyi Lama.
2️⃣ Just before Pakshi died, he handed over the monastic seat to the adept Urgyenpa and said, “An upholder of the Black Hat lineage will come from the direction of Nyima Latö.
In the meantime, act as regent.” He placed on the head of Urgyenpa the black hat with the gold front.
1️⃣ Not long after that, he passed into nirvana, and his reincarnation was born in the birthplace of Mila, Latö; this was the trulku Rangjung Dorjé.
1️⃣ Thus, the first of the Karma line was Düsum Khyenpa.
2️⃣ The second was Pakshi.
1️⃣ From there came the successive trulkus: the third was Rangjung Dorjé; the fourth was Rölpai Dorjé; the fifth was Deshin Shekpa; the sixth was Tongwa Dönden; the seventh was Chödrak Gyatso; the eighth was Mikyö Dorjé; the ninth was Wangchuk Dorjé; the tenth was Chöying Dorjé; the eleventh was Yeshé Dorjé; the twelfth was Jangchup Dorjé; the thirteenth, now living, is Düdül Drakpa Dorjé.
2️⃣ That is the sequence.
The Red Hats Jetsün Tilopa’s disciple Dāsānanda died and was reborn in Jālandhara as a brahman disciple of Nāropa named Sarvavid who came to Tibet and met with Jetsün Milarepa.
He died while living a life of austerity in the Nepal-Tibet border area and was reborn as Tsültrim Pal, who became a disciple of Jé Gampopa and Rechungpa.
1️⃣ His reincarnation, the fully ordained monk Namkha Ö, was a disciple of Jé Düsum Khyenpa.
1️⃣ Namkha Ö’s reincarnation, Tashi Drakpa, became a disciple of Karma Pakshi.
1️⃣ Tashi Drakpa’s reincarnation was Tokden Drakpa Sengé.
Drakpa Sengé had many lamas, such as Jé Rangjung Dorjé, and he studied sutra and mantra extensively.
1️⃣ He possessed the countless good qualities of scriptural study and inner realization.
He also had many disciples, such as Yakdé Panchen.
1️⃣ Drakpa Sengé’s reincarnation was the second Red Hat trulku, Khachö Wangpo.
1️⃣ His reincarnation was the third, Chöpal Yeshé.
His reincarnation was the fourth Red Hat crown holder, Chökyi Drakpa Yeshé Pal Sangpo.
2️⃣ Then came the fifth, Könchok Yenlak, the sixth, Garwang Chökyi Wangchuk, the seventh, Palden Yeshé Nyingpo, and the eighth, Chökyi Döndrup.
1️⃣ After that, there were several purported Red Hat reincarnations, and the rebirth lineages of Gyaltsap, Pawo, and Situ also appeared.
1️⃣ The members of the Red and Black Hat reincarnation lineages led lives that were mostly those of scholars and adepts, and they also wrote many treatises.
The astrological treatise and account of the previous lives of the Buddha and other works written by Rangjung Dorjé spread widely.
Mikyö Dorjé was an expert in all the sciences of inner meaning and therefore wrote a great many excellent works.
Although on the face of it he wrote refutations of Jé Rinpoché, out of heartfelt respect he urged Sera Jetsünpa to write a reply to Gorampa and Shākya Chokden; and although he himself wrote a textbook on the perfection of wisdom elucidating the meaning of the Maitreya texts as extrinsic emptiness, he stated whatever was proper and necessary for refutation and proof, so when Sera Jetsünpa and his spiritual sons in turn offered written objections, replies, and so forth, he was very pleased.
1️⃣ It is also said that he later had a vision of Jé Rinpoché.
1️⃣ Be that as it may, he did write a repentant confession and a eulogy of Tsongkhapa.
1️⃣ Mikyö Dorjé’s disciple Pawo Tsuklak Trengwa is also rightly reckoned a sage.
He wrote many texts, such as the Great Commentary on the Way of the Bodhisattva, a treatise on astrology, a Dharma history, and others.
1️⃣ Chökyi Nyinjé of the Situ reincarnation lineage founded the teaching center of Palpung in Dergé, Kham.
It seems there was never a latter-day expert in the conventional sciences greater than he.
He made new and revised translations, and he wrote a great many texts on the sciences.
1️⃣ A biography of him contains this statement: Situ first held the Madhyamaka view, but when a Nyingmapa prophesied that he would have a long life if he adopted the Jonang view, he went to the vicinity of the Bodhnāth stupa, renounced the Madhyamaka view, and vowed, “I will uphold the extrinsic emptiness view.”
1️⃣ This statement is in a biography whose author’s head is so rotten, he cannot smell it himself. Since each Karmapa had many disciples and grand-disciples, their teaching spread with many Karma-tradition Dharma lineages and monasteries here, there, and everywhere.
1️⃣ When the time was right, and they saw that it would be meaningful, Karmapa Mikyö Dorjé, Pawo Tsuklak Trengwa, Drukpa Pema Karpo, and others engaged in extensive activities related to the sciences and other outer pursuits.
1️⃣ Since then, most Karmapas and Drukpas have turned their attention to conventional activities, and I think that the assiduous practice of earlier times has deteriorated somewhat.
1️⃣ Norbu Sangpo, who belonged to the line of Rinpung rulers, became the patron of Sempa Shönu Gyalchokpa, and being in a preceptor-patron relationship with the Gedenpas, he erected a great Maitreya statue and performed other works in Jamchen.
1️⃣ Some of the Rinpung rulers, however, such as his successor, Künsang Dönyö Dorjé, were very hostile to the Gelukpas and repeatedly assembled armies in Kyishö and made many preparations for an attempt to eliminate the Gedenpas.
1️⃣ Later there was a popular uprising against the poet-savant Jikten Wangchuk, and he lost power.
Subsequently, Karma Tseten, his son Phüntsok Namgyal, and Phüntsok’s son Karma Tenkyong Wangpo ruled in Tsang.
1️⃣ When those in a preceptor-patron relationship made trouble for the Gedenpas, it was like the example quoted in Sakya Pandita’s Well-Spoken Advice from Sakya: A torch held downward Will scorch the hand of the holder.
Gushri Tenzin Chögyal came to Tibet from Kokonor and utterly destroyed the Karmapas’ power with his military.
1️⃣ If at that time the upholders of the Karmapa teaching had abided in the nature of Mahāmudrā — which, with its impartiality toward philosophical systems, is free from the elaborations of prejudice, anxiety, and so forth — then even though their patrons’ power declined, it goes without saying that the great fluctuations of the Karmapa teaching would not have occurred.
1️⃣ As a Tibetan sage says, “Mahāmudrā meditators became more and more politically active.
1️⃣ Trusting the bad advice of Karma Tenkyong and others, the Karmapas performed all sorts of deluded actions out of inner conviction, and so from then on, the Karmapa teaching went into decline.
1️⃣ Much later, an evil Gurkha army sacked Tashi Lhünpo because of the schemes of the purported Red Hat trulku, Chödrup Gyatso, and in retaliation the Chinese emperor obliterated Yangpachen and other Red Hat monasteries.
At the present time, the Karmapa teaching has greatly deteriorated, so the Black Hat trulku just lives in Tsurphu, concentrating on the four trainings of a recluse.
2️⃣ That is all that remains.
1️⃣ Phakdru Kagyü The Phakdru Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from the conqueror Phakmo Drupa, who was the main spiritual son of the peerless Dakpo Lharjé and was consecrated as lord of the Kagyü.
He was born in southeastern Tibet.
When he reached age seven, a state of tranquil abiding arose in him naturally.
At the age of nine, he took preliminary ordination at the so-called Jakhyi temple from the preceptor known as Lhingé Yenthup Tsültrim and master Lhingé Öser Gyatso.
1️⃣ He was given the name Dorjé Gyalpo.
1️⃣ He knew writing and religious drawing without training.
While he stayed in Kham, he studied under some sixteen masters.
1️⃣ He also gave occasional expositions of the Way of the Bodhisattva.
At the age of nineteen, he went to Ü. In Tölung, he received the Dharma from Geshé Gyamarwa and Chapa Chökyi Sengé.
When he was twenty-five, with Jadül as preceptor, Gyamar as master, and Ar as secret instructor, he took full ordination in Sülphu.
He received vinaya teachings from his preceptor and master, the perfection of wisdom from his secret instructor, and the Way of the Bodhisattva and other works from Nyangdren, and gained fame as a great sage.
Moreover, studying with Mar Chögyal, Palchen Dralo, Sachen Künga Nyingpo, Jim Lotsāwa, and Jangsem Dawa Gyaltsen, he received many instructions on sutra and mantra.
Then he went to Gampo, and by hearing instructions from the peerless Dakpo Lharjé, he gained a supreme realization of Mahāmudrā and reportedly said: “All previous Dharmas have become like skin and husk.”
After he built his monastic seat on a lovely forest slope in Phakmo Dru, he became known as “Phakmo Drupa Dromgön, the protector of beings”; and when he stayed at the base of the Jewel Heap Boulder, he became known as Tatsawa, “the one at the base.”
1️⃣ Also, he believed himself to have the same nature as the Blessed One, Śākyamuni.
When he developed his disciples, many became adepts.
1️⃣ Of the eight hundred monks who were disciples, it is reputed that five hundred became great parasol-bearing scholars.
1️⃣ In particular, there were the great ārya sons.
1️⃣ Those called the four utmost sons were: Taklung Thangpa Tashi Pal, utmost in devotion; Lingrepa Pema Dorjé of Naphu, utmost in realization; Parphupa Lodrö Sengé, utmost in wisdom; and Chenbu Gyarepa, utmost in ability.
Those called the four sons of the teaching were: Kalden Yeshé Sengé, Tokden Minyak Gomring, Drupthop Nyakri Sewo, and Künden Tsangpa Rechung.
1️⃣ Those called the three-and-a-half who realized the single taste were: the Dharma lord Drigung Jikten Gönpo, Bandha Phukpa, the Dharma lord Dum, and the Dharma lord Tum.
1️⃣ Those called the four heart sons were: Shengom Karwa, Nyang Shendrongma, Ngok Sengé Khapa, and Tsilungpa.
Those called the four literary sons were: Rinpoché Shuktsarpa, Lhapa Gendün Kyap, Drugu Tönpa Lodrö Sengé, and Gyana Thangpo.
Those called the four close sons were: Lama Marwa, Yephukpa, Gyergom, and Geshé Sengé Pal.
1️⃣ Moreover, there were beings beyond number who became adepts.
1️⃣ After Dromgön Phakmo Drupa, Kyura Rinpoché briefly administered Densa Thil.
1️⃣ After him came Chenga Drakpa Jungné, born in the family of Lang Lhasik.
1️⃣ Then came, successively: Chenga Thokdukpa, Chunyipa Rinchen Dorjé, Rinpoché Drakpa Yeshé, Nyichöpa Drakpa Rinchen, Tseshi Nyingmapa Drakpa Gyaltsen, and Chunyi Sarmapa Drak Sherap.
1️⃣ The latter’s elder brother, Jangchup Gyaltsen, became the ruler of Ü and Tsang.
1️⃣ Tseshi Sarma Drakpa Jangchup’s spiritual biography is in a collection of short texts written by the conqueror Tsongkhapa.
1️⃣ After Tseshi came many more, such as Dharma lord Sönam Gyaltsen, Chenga Palden Sangpo, and Nyernyi Rinpoché.
In particular, the Dharma lord Sönam Gyaltsen became a disciple of Jetsün Tsongkhapa the great.
He combined in a single text both the old instruction on the six Dharmas of Nāropa and the new instruction on the same six Dharmas as posited by Jé Tsongkhapa; he wrote a guidebook called the Great Bliss with Thousands of Illuminating Light Rays, which applied such sources as Saraha’s Treasury of Dohas, Nāgārjuna’s Five Stages, and other tantric texts.
1️⃣ A great many Kagyü centers and monasteries spread from the monastic seat at Phakdru; some I will explain below.
1️⃣ Shangtsal Kagyü The Shangtsal Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from Shang Drowai Gönpo Yudrakpa.
1️⃣ He was born in Kyishö and was named Darma Drak.
From age nine to eighteen, he received many teachings on sutra and mantra.
At twenty-six, he took full ordination and was given the name Tsöndrü Drakpa.
1️⃣ He received many instructions from Galo.
1️⃣ He met Dakpo Lharjé’s disciple Gampopa Tsültrim Nyingpo and, when he received teachings on Mahāmudrā, won the blessings of the oral lineage (kagyü).
He plainly saw the nature of mind.
1️⃣ He erected the Gungthang temple in Tsal, along with its great image.
1️⃣ He had a great purpose in mind, yet he made much trouble, and many ordinary beings amassed evil through this, so Karma Düsum Khyenpa stopped him.
1️⃣ From then on he made no trouble.
1️⃣ Having manifested seven transformed bodies in seven places, he became known as Seven Names.
2️⃣ He did whatever he was told by the raven-headed Dharma protector.
1️⃣ He performed countless pure deeds and passed into nirvana at seventy-two.
1️⃣ Although he had many disciples, the chief ones were: Namkha Ö, Kharakpa Dülwa Ö, Lhachukpa Nyida Ö, and Drirawa Shākya Ö. All four of those founded monasteries.
Dülwa Ö founded Lutül Monastery in Kharak, and it is said that during his leadership, the assembly numbered some ten thousand monks.
1️⃣ The actual monastic seat at Tsal was administered by the peerless Shākya Yeshé, and then by Lopön Jangyé, Lhachukpa Nyida Ö, Sangyé Bum, Sangyé Nyingpo, Sangyé Repa, Serkhang Tengpa, and others.
1️⃣ Since those, such as Marpa Ö, who came subsequently at Tsal performed service for the teaching, the lineage is also known as the Tsalpa Kagyü.
1️⃣ As long as Tsal was administered by a succession of great leaders, such as Pönchen Darma Shönu and Sangyé Ngödrup, the teaching survived unimpaired.
1️⃣ Later, Tsalpa power declined, and the temples were destroyed by fire.
1️⃣ Now only statues, texts, stupas, the chapels of protectors, and other remains are left.
1️⃣ Drigung Kagyü The Drigung is the lineage transmitted from the guardian Jikten Gönpo.
1️⃣ His birthplace was Denma, his family the Kyura.
1️⃣ He took birth in the water-sow year.
He went to meet Dromgön Phakmo Drupa at an early age.
He was given the name Rinchen Pal.
When he received instruction, he gained the great gnosis that sees directly the real nature of all dharmas.
He fell ill with leprosy, and when he meditated on great compassion, the nāga tsen demon and his retinue left his body, and he saw them leave.
At that, he recovered from the illness. When he reached age twenty-five, he took full ordination, with Sumtokpa acting as preceptor.
At age thirty-seven, he went to Drigung and founded a monastery.
It gradually expanded, and a large number of monks gathered there.
2️⃣ Once, when Nyö Gyalwa Lhanangpa conducted a religious festival, monks attended.
It is reported that on one occasion, the ritual counting stick recorded a hundred thousand fully ordained monks.
Jikten Gönpo’s renown pervaded Jambudvīpa, and it was suggested that he was an emanation of Nāgārjuna.
1️⃣ At the age of seventy-five, he pretended to pass away.
Although there were countless disciples, chief among them were the four Chengas; the trio of Nyö Gyalwa Lhanangpa, Gar Dampa Chödingpa, and Chö Mönlam; the twelve Palchens; and others.
1️⃣ The heads of the monastic seat were Jé Chenga Rinpoché, Wön Rinpoché, Chung Rinpoché, Nyogyalwa Lhanangpa, Gardampa Chödingpa, Palchen Chöyé, Wön Sherap Jungné, and others.
1️⃣ Sherap Jungné was of the nephew of the guardian Jikten Gönpo.
1️⃣ His service to his lama was unbounded, as was his knowledge.
1️⃣ He wrote down the special Dharmas posited by the guardian, which are known as the single intention.
From him, the teaching went in sequence to many in the monastic succession.
1️⃣ In later times, Rinchen Phüntsok and Chökyi Drakpa became great Nyingma tantric masters, and his highness the Great Fifth Dalai Lama praised them extensively.
Shapdrung Trulung, however, split from the Kagyü Dharma, and Karma Mikyö Dorjé recounts how misfortune occurred when he made the Nyingma cycle on the iron scorpion his main practice.
2️⃣ He also directed sorcery against the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso.
1️⃣ That omniscient one went into retreat, and for a week he performed the practice of the miraculous wheel of the fierce Yamāntaka, so an illness infected the Drigungpas.
1️⃣ It seems that from that time when they cut the precious rope of the lineage of the noble guardian Jikten Gönpo, they became virtually extinct.
Now, there are few monks, and the monastic seat, though it is near a main road and has some shrines, also remains in difficulty.
That notwithstanding, they are known as Drigungpas by the place name of their monastic seat.
Drukpa Kagyü The Drukpa is the lineage transmitted from the conqueror Phakmo Drupa’s disciples Lingrepa Pema Dorjé and the Dharma lord Tsangpa Gyarepa.
The adept Lingrepa was born in upper Nyang.
1️⃣ He was given the name Pema Dorjé.
He learned to read at the age of nine.
1️⃣ At thirteen, he gained mastery of all good qualities.
When he reached seventeen, he took his lay vows from Master Ling.
At thirty-eight, he met Phakmo Drupa.
When he received guidelines and meditated on them, he gained an extraordinary realization in three days.
When he offered his realization, the protector of beings was delighted.
Lingrepa worked extensively for the sake of beings everywhere.
His main disciple was Jetsün Tsangpa Gyaré.
1️⃣ He was born in a section of Khulé, in upper Nyang.
He was given the name Yungdrung Pal.
When he was twelve, his father left him at his older brother’s place, where he put in a great deal of study.
When he was thirteen, he cut his hair and was given the name Sherap Pal.
Later, he took his preliminary vows from Lama Shang and was given the name Yeshé Dorjé.
When he was twenty-two, he met Jetsün Lingrepa, who was staying in Ralung.
1️⃣ He presented him a full measure of salt and often sought him out for conversation.
Then he went to Ü. He met Lingrepa again in Naphu, and seven days after hearing instructions on the six Dharmas, the yoga of the coemergent, and other practices, he gained the ability to wear a cotton garment.
He walled himself in for the winter, and when he meditated, he was able to combine the outer and inner winds and pass unobstructed through walls, and he gained a clear concentration on emptiness vast as space.
1️⃣ He revealed the Six About the Taste of Sameness, which had been hidden as a treasure by Jetsün Rechungpa.
As prophesied by Lama Shang, he founded the monastery of Longdöl.
1️⃣ As prophesied by his meditational deity, he founded Ralung.
1️⃣ As prophesied by Lingrepa, he founded Druk.
When the latter was newly built, fierce claps of thunder resounded over the plain, so the monastery was given the name “Druk.”
Because of that, upholders of the lineage are dubbed “Drukpas.”
It is said that Tsangpa Gyaré collected some fifty thousand disciples.
1️⃣ He did wondrous things for the sake of beings and was reputed to be an emanation of Nāropa.
His disciple lineage spread as far as a vulture flies in eighteen days.
1️⃣ It is widely remarked that half of all people were Drukpas, half of all Drukpas were mendicants, and half of all mendicants were adepts.
1️⃣ The chief of Tsangpa Gyarepa’s many disciples were the first two great ones, Pariwa and Kyangmo Khapa; the middle two great ones, Gyayakpa and Dremopa; the last two great ones, Lorepa and Götsangpa; the three other cotton-clad ones; the three yogins; the three who had destroyed delusions; and others — there were many.
1️⃣ Wönré Darma Sengé presided over the monastic seat.
1️⃣ After him, those who came in the family lineage and performed great deeds included Gyalwang Chöjé, his disciple Lhatsepa Ngawang Sangpo, and then the poet-sage Sangyé Dorjé, Bökhepa, and others; this excellent disciple lineage was propagated in many places.
In particular, the renowned scholar Pema Karpo wrote many commentaries.
1️⃣ His reincarnations were Paksam Wangpo and others.
1️⃣ Also, there were the two known as Tsangnyön and Ünyön, and some amazing adepts, like Druknyön Künlek.
1️⃣ Those are known as the middle Druk.
1️⃣ The lives of Lorepa and Götsangpa were quite amazing.
1️⃣ Specifically, they did many things that should be taken as examples by those doing serious practice, of which the chief is this: through hardship and dedication, they transformed all evil conditions into the path and brought the practice to completion. This can be seen in detail in their individual biographies.
Here, I will mention only the basics.
1️⃣ The conqueror Lorepa took preliminary ordination at Kyormo Lung from the preceptor Balti; the name he was given was Wangchuk Tsöndrü.
He took six great vows, six ancillary vows, and one special vow, so his life is one of thirteen vows.
1️⃣ He focused on the Muni’s instruction on the fivefold.
1️⃣ He had countless disciples who were in the family lineage: the three masters (Jamyang Gönpo and others), the three cotton-clad ones (Tsāri Rechen and others), the three yogins (Ā, Lo, and Shākya), and others.
1️⃣ Of these, Jamyang Gönpo spread widely the Chö instructions called the heart essence of profound meaning and the tenfold door-opener.
Tsāri Repa developed the tradition through his extensive activities, so there were many disciples.
1️⃣ Those are known as the lower Druk.
1️⃣ The original name of Götsangpa Gönpo Dorjé was Döndrup Sengé.
1️⃣ He was given the name Gönpo Dorjé when he took preliminary ordination from Tsangpa Gyaré.
He has a life story that is beyond imagining: twelve mental vows; the thirteen coats of armor; three vows of body, speech, and mind; seven temporary vows; five especially distinctive vows; and others.
1️⃣ His four main disciples were: the conqueror Yangönpa, the adept Urgyenpa, Chilkarwa, and Neringpa.
1️⃣ Moreover, those disciples had many disciples, including Yangönpa’s disciple, Chenga Rinden.
His disciple was Surphukpa Rinchen Palsang.
Surphukpa’s disciple was Barawa Gyaltsen Palsang, who wrote many treatises, including the trilogy on the Boat of Liberation and other works.
Those many disciples are known as the upper Druk.
1️⃣ The adept Urgyenpa Rinchen Pal went to Bodhgaya, Jālandhara, and Uḍḍiyāna in India.
1️⃣ There he was blessed by many ḍākinīs, so his mental continuum was freed through his realizations.
Invited by Kublai, the king of Mongolia, he went there, too.
1️⃣ Disciples who were upholders of his Dharma lineages were Karma Rangjung Dorjé, Tokden Daseng, and others.
Shonglo Dorjé Gyaltsen and Loten also became his disciples.
1️⃣ Also in his disciple lineage was Götruk Drakpa Jungné.
1️⃣ Chilkar did not take on any disciples.
Neringpa was known as Gangchen Shākya Pal and founded the monastery of Nering.
1️⃣ Estimable members of the family lineage succeeded him; Neringpa Chimé Rapgyé, the biographer of Jé Rinpoché, is in the family lineage.
1️⃣ Therefore, the lineage transmitted from Lorepa is called the lower Druk, and the lineage from master Götsang and his disciples is called the upper Druk.
2️⃣ They are renowned for being so numerous that “the upper Druk is the stars in the sky and the lower Druk is the greenery of the earth.”
At the present time, the upper, lower, middle, and other Drukpa are widespread and well off, but it seems that the Dharma lineages are for the most part barely intact.
Taklung Kagyü The Taklung Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from the great Taklung Thangpa.
2️⃣ His family was the Gazi.
1️⃣ He was born in Yangshö Bongra Teng.
1️⃣ He ordained as a novice with Tönla Gangpa Sherap Dorjé as preceptor.
1️⃣ The name given him was Tashi Pal.
1️⃣ Although he prepared several times to go to India, his friends and other acquaintances would not let him go.
Then, he heard of the fame of Phakmo Drupa, and at age twenty-four, he went to him and became his attendant.
1️⃣ Phakdru loved him and gave him the instructions in their entirety.
1️⃣ Once, Tashi Pal went to relax in a meadow in Tel, and on that spot he entered meditative equipoise and gained an extraordinary realization.
1️⃣ When the protector of beings Phakmo Drupa got there, he pointed his walking stick at Tashi Pal’s heart and stated, among other things, “Our noble lord Nāropa said, ‘If, in the midst of meditating on all dharmas as empty of inherent existence and without self, you practice various methods through the four immeasurables, then that is the path for attaining the nonabiding nirvana.’”
1️⃣ After Phakmo Drupa passed away, Tashi Pal went to Maldro and received Kadam teachings from Chekawa.
2️⃣ He took full ordination from Shang Shomrawa.
1️⃣ At the age of thirty-nine, he was invited to Taklung by the inhabitants of the three centers, Dar, Bé, and Rong, as well as those in Phödo.
As prophesied by the protector of beings, he founded a monastery in that place, so he became known as Taklung Thangpa.
1️⃣ He also placed a powerful rock tsen demon under a vow.
1️⃣ From the time he took preliminary vows, he observed the vinaya rituals scrupulously: he never went to the houses of lay people, never asked for meat or liquor, never served meat or liquor, never brought women inside the compound, and so forth.
1️⃣ Just before he left his body, over three thousand monks gathered, and he displayed a multitude of wondrous magical powers.
1️⃣ He passed away at sixty-nine.
1️⃣ Wön Rinchen Gönpo was put in charge of the monastic seat.
He built a great ritual hall and extended the monastery.
1️⃣ After him, Sangyé Yarjön presided over the monastic seat.
He had two disciples capable of holding the throne: Wön Tashi Lama and Sangyé Wön. Sangyé Wönpo Drakpa Pal Öser Sangpo went to Kham and founded the monastery of Riwoché.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, the teaching was split into the upper-plain Taklung and the lower-plain Taklung.
1️⃣ Thirty-eight hundred monks belonged to each.
From there, the Taklung monasteries and Dharma lineage were propagated in many areas in Ü, Tsang, Amdo, Kham, and elsewhere.
1️⃣ All who succeeded in the abbatial lineage were eminent persons with amazing qualities.
In particular, there was a great scholar-adept in later times named Taklung Ngawang Drakpa.
1️⃣ Because of his great fame, he was honored by the upper classes of Ü and Tsang.
1️⃣ His activities, such as reviving the Dharma traditions of Drigung and Taklung when they were on the verge of extinction, were quite extensive.
1️⃣ The man known as Shapdrung Ngawang Namgyal had deeply studied countless scriptures and was famous for his scholarship, discipline, and goodness.
He spread the Dharma in many places, writing the Wonderful Ocean Dharma History and other texts.
At present, there appear to be quite a few temples and monks from the family line of Gazi and the reincarnation lineage of the trulkus of the upper-field and lower-field Taklung, but as to how the Dharma lineage and other aspects of the tradition are faring, I have no information.
Barom Kagyü The Barom Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from Barom Darma Wangchuk, who was reputed to be a reincarnation of the tantric yogin Kṛṣṇācārya.
He was born in Phenyül.
1️⃣ When he was small, a tiny, youthful tantric master came to his residence and spoke favorably of Gampopa. He said that it would be proper for Darma Wangchuk to go to him and accompanied him on the journey.
2️⃣ When they arrived at Gampo, the tiny tantric master disappeared without a trace, and Darma Wangchuk knew that he had been an emanation of Gampopa.
From then on, he was looked after by Gampopa, and when he practiced the guidelines he had been given, he became supremely realized.
He founded the monastery of Barom in the north.
2️⃣ He gave the name mixture and transference to the bliss-emptiness Mahāmudrā, and the name sole pursuit of the narrow path of knowledge to the ultimate-nature Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ He attracted many disciples and gave them guidance.
1️⃣ His main spiritual son was Tishri Repa; the monastic seat was held successively by the latter’s family lineage.
Apparently, the disciple lineage did not become too widespread.
1️⃣ I have not found out how it is faring at present.
Yasang Kagyü The Yasang Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from Kalden Yeshé Sengé, a disciple of the protector of beings, Phakmo Drupa.
He was born in Möngar.
Once in his youth when he went to herd goats, he merely saw the mountain of Phakmo Drupa’s monastery from an opposite mountain and a meditative state dawned on its own.
2️⃣ After that, he met the protector of beings; once they were introduced, he was given the name Kalden Yeshé Sengé.
His disciple was Yasang Chöjé, whose family was the Nup.
1️⃣ He took his preliminary vows from the preceptor known as Chötön; he was given the name Chö Mönlam.
Having received vinaya teachings from Shami Mönlam Ö’s disciple Lupkar Tsültrim Drak, he mainly focused on the explanation and praxis of the vinaya, so he became known as the vinaya master of Nup.
He heard of the fame of Kalden Yeshé Sengé and went to meet him.
Merely by seeing Kalden’s face, he gained a realization of his lama’s mind and his own mind as nondual.
1️⃣ When he was thirty-eight, he founded the monastery of Yasang.
1️⃣ He met the seer Rāhula directly in a vision and was given special instructions for protection from strokes.
1️⃣ He matured and freed countless human and nonhuman students and passed away at sixty-five.
His disciples were known as the four great sons: Nyalmé Pal Riwa Sangyé Jagom, Gorgongpa Sangyé Lhagom, Serdewa Sangyé Legom, and Gönsarpa Sangyé Gyagom.
After that, those who followed in the lineage were known as the Yasang Kagyü.
Nowadays, only a temple and a statue of Lhamo known as Quick Action remain at the monastic seat.
1️⃣ The Trophu Kagyü is the lineage transmitted from the brothers Rinpoché Gyaltsa and Künden Repa, who were disciples of Phakmo Drupa.
1️⃣ Rinpoché Gyaltsa was born in lower Shawa, in the family line of Nup Namkhai Nyingpo.
From the age of five, he studied writing and calculation.
From the time he was young, he was intent on the Dharma.
He received Dharma teachings many times from numerous lamas, such as Nur Nyima and others.
At the age of nineteen, he went to Ü. He met a direct disciple of Puhrang Lotsāwa named Mar Chökyi Gyalpo, as well as others, and on the advice of Lama Mar, he went to Phakmo Drupa.
When he received instructions from him, he gained an extraordinary realization of Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ He requested teachings on Chö from Machik Lapdrön’s son, Thönyön Samdrup.
1️⃣ He died at seventy-eight.
1️⃣ Künden Repa was the younger brother of Rinpoché Gyaltsa.
He went to take provisions to his brother at Phakmo Dru when the life of Milarepa was being taught there. Thinking, “I should act like that,” he nodded his head three times in that Dharma assembly.
He asked the protector of beings for instructions, and by meditating he obtained an extraordinary realization. He became a great adept.
1️⃣ Once, during a famine, he knocked on the door of the ritual hall of Trophu with his staff, saying, “O yoginīs, I ask for alms for the yogin today,” and a great deal of barley came out the doors of the ritual hall.
All the people of the region took some, yet after five days the barley was still not exhausted, another sign of his being an adept.
1️⃣ Künden Repa died at the age of seventy, in the fire female ox year.
The nephew of the brothers Rinpoché Gyaltsa and Künden Repa was Trophu Lotsāwa.
1️⃣ He took birth as the son of Jephen, his father, and Sekma Saljé, his mother.
He learned to read at the age of six.
When he was eight, he met Gyaltsa.
When he was ten, he became a novice, with Gyaltsa and Künden as preceptor and master respectively; he was given the name Jampa Pal.
At nineteen, he took full ordination.
From Künden and Gyaltsa, he received different systems of instruction and thirteen special oral traditions.
When he was twenty-four, he went to Nepal.
He met the pandit Buddhaśrī and invited Mitrayogi to Tibet.
1️⃣ The latter blessed the land for the foundation of Trophu.
1️⃣ On the heels of that, he also invited Buddhaśrī.
After that, he went to the trading center of Vaidurya and invited the Kashmiri pandit Śākyaśrī.
1️⃣ He erected a great deity image eighty cubits high.
1️⃣ Sempa Chenpo became his spiritual son.
1️⃣ Trophu Lotsāwa gained the ability to fulfill the aims of beings and perform countless deeds.
1️⃣ Among the disciples of Gyaltsa and Künden were Chegom and Machik Rema; those in the lineage subsequent to them are called the Trophu Kagyü.
1️⃣ Although it seems as if Trophu Lotsāwa Jampa Pal developed a philosophical system unlike that of other Kagyüpas, in the nine-grain instruction, the four-three-twelve heart discourse, the nine-meaning Mahāmudrā, and other practices taught by him, the stated presentations of the view actually appear to be simply the Kagyü Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ Not only that, but the cycles variously taught here and there by the great pandit Śākyaśrī, which are included within the Hundreds of Basic Special Instructions of Trophu, as well as the progression of views in the Treatise on Freedom from Bondage taught by Dorjé Denpa, that is, Śākaliṅgadeva, as well as other texts, also accord with the Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ After Trophu Lotsāwa came Lachen Söwang and Sempa Chenpo; the latter’s disciple, Yangtsewa Rinchen Sengé; and Yangtsewa’s disciple, Butön Rinpoché.
1️⃣ A discussion of how Butön upheld a separate system will appear below.
1️⃣ Although the teaching and study of the great texts once spread in Trophu, it then dissolved as a hūṃ does, from the ū to the nāda.
At the present time, just a few in the guise of Bhutanese novices sometimes recite the Ornament of Higher Realization just once in front of the great Maitreya statue. That is all that remains.
1️⃣ Summary Well, then, what qualities differentiate that multitude of Kagyü schools, which have different individual names even though they are of one nature?
1️⃣ It is as explained in the Wonderful Ocean Dharma History of Taklung Ngawang Namgyal: In short, atop a foundation of Śrāvakayāna renunciation, Mahayana arousing of the awakening mind, and the pure secret vows of secret mantra are the special Dharmas of the precious Kagyü: Marpa and Ngok’s explanations of the tantras, Mila’s dedication and instructions, Gampopa’s cleansing of the nature of mind, the Karmapas’ practice for making wind and mind indistinguishable, Shang’s supreme and ultimate path, Barompa’s hidden path of mixture and transference, Phakdru’s secret mantra, Taklungpa’s thirty-nine liberations, Drigungpa’s three vows with a single key point, Tsangpa Gyarepa’s dependent arising and the taste of sameness, and Lo and Gö’s devotion to Dharma and disgust for samsara.
1️⃣ Although each is “the same, yet distinctive,” each fully possesses all the others; it is suitable to establish their distinct qualities based on how teachers, having focused on some particular practice, guided and developed disciples.
In their entirety, they are renowned in the three worlds as “the teaching of the precious Kagyü.”
1️⃣ b. A partial exposition of the presentation of view and meditation among the Kagyüpa Views The view of Marpa, the wellspring of the Dakpo Kagyü, is the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka view.
Marpa’s main gurus were Nāropa and the great Maitrīpa, and whenever Marpa explained any view, meditation, conduct, or tantra, he based it on those two; specifically, there is a statement in Marpa’s own songs that Maitrīpa is the guru who completely severed his superimposition: I went to the east, to the banks of the Ganges River.
1️⃣ Through the kindness of the great Jé Maitrīpa, I realized the foundation, reality itself, as unarisen.
I took hold of the emptiness of mind, I saw the meaning of the original nature, free from elaboration, I met the mother, the three bodies, in person.
1️⃣ From then on, I was a man who had severed elaboration.
When he realized through the kindness of Maitrīpa that mind is ultimately unarisen, he took hold of the real nature of mind, the “original nature of mind,” which is empty of true existence.
When he meditated on that in connection with the profound path of the completion stage, he attained the three bodies in general and, in particular, the encounter of the mother and son clear lights named dharmakāya; through that, all elaboration was severed.
So it is stated.
1️⃣ Lord Maitrīpa was not just a Mādhyamika; he gave primacy to the system of the glorious Candrakīrti.
1️⃣ According to Maitrīpa’s vital text, the Ten Principles: Those who wish to know reality Don’t see it with aspects or without aspects; That Madhyamaka not adorned By the guru’s speech is merely middling. “
1️⃣ With aspects” refers to the view of the Sautrāntikas, and “without aspects” refers to the view of the Vaibhāśikas, which are both śrāvaka schools.
1️⃣ Alternatively, “with aspects” refers to true aspectarians and “without aspect” refers to false aspectarians, which are both Cittamātrins; neither of them realizes the meaning of reality.
Not only that, but Maitrīpa also states that a Madhyamaka not adorned by the guru’s special instructions is only a middling Madhyamaka. The instructions of the guru are solely the instructions of the glorious Candrakīrtipāda.
1️⃣ So it is explained in the commentary by Maitrīpa’s direct disciple, the pandit Sahajavajra.
The great pandit Nāropa also upheld only the system of Candrakīrti.
1️⃣ In a commentary on the later tantras, he himself states: In this commentary on the later tantras, I have relied on Candrakīrti’s Bright Lamp To explain the special instructions of Nāgārjuna.
1️⃣ He also states: I have relied on the successive special instructions Of masters Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva, Nāgabodhi and Śākyamitra, Candrakīrti, and others.
1️⃣ Because of those and other statements, and because his explanation of the view precisely resembles that of Candrakīrti, Nāropa was a Prāsaṅgika.
1️⃣ It is said that the view in the songs of Jetsün Milarepa also accords for the most part with the Prāsaṅgika: To accord with the thought Of inferior minds, the omniscient Buddha Stated, “Everything exists.”
1️⃣ In terms of ultimate truth, though, There is no buddhahood apart from hindrances.
There are no meditators nor objects of meditation, No stages to be traversed, nor signs of the path, No resultant bodies nor gnosis, And therefore no nirvana: These are merely imputed by name and word.
There is nothing inanimate or animate in the three worlds: From the beginning, all are unestablished and unarisen, Baseless and noncoemergent; There is no karma nor karmic ripening, And therefore not even the name samsara exists.
In the ultimate sense, that’s how it is.
1️⃣ This shows how all dharmas, from form through omniscience, are ultimately nonexistent. Also: Amazing!
If there were no sentient beings, Whence would the buddhas of the three times arise?
Since effect is impossible without a cause, In terms of conventional truth, The Muni has stated: “Samsara And nirvana: all exists.”
1️⃣ Thus, although they do not truly exist, conventionally samsara and nirvana, action and actor, cause and effect, are all existent.
1️⃣ Also: Sages with such realization Don’t see consciousness but see gnosis, Don’t see sentient beings but see buddhas, Don’t see phenomena but see reality itself.
1️⃣ The gnosis of an ārya in meditative equipoise sees emptiness through direct perception.
1️⃣ While it does not see what appears to a mistaken consciousness, it does see what appears to an unmistaken gnosis.
1️⃣ In the seeing in which that gnosis sees reality itself, there is nothing that could be qualified as a sentient being. “
1️⃣ Buddha” is reality itself, which is named dharmakāya.
1️⃣ Thus, it may be said that the view postulated by Milarepa is very much in accord with the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka.
Now, Marpa had gurus who were scholar-adepts, and he mastered countless instructions received from them; seeing the mental capacity of some of his disciples, he set out instructions in accord with Cittamātra.
Also, in some places in the religious songs of Milarepa, he identifies the four yogas, and it seems that he explains the view in the yogas in terms of Madhyamaka or Cittamātra, as befits the case.
Thus, earlier authoritative holy beings like Marpa, Milarepa, and other masters who were expert at guiding disciples saw the intellectual capacity of those requesting instruction and taught quite a bit on view, meditation, and conduct. They were unlike commentators of today, who carelessly expound everything they know, without any limits, so it is not definite that all the views they taught were consistently Madhyamaka.
1️⃣ Mahāmudrā As to the application of the term mahāmudrā: In the songs of Mila, phrases such as “the citadel of Mahāmudrā view” and others make only passing reference to the term mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ The one who made the practice famous was Dakpo Lharjé.
In his texts, the view is identified as twofold, a perfection-vehicle system and the mantra-vehicle system, and he gave the name “instructions on Mahāmudrā” to both.
Quoting many sutras to the effect that emptiness is taught in the perfection-vehicle system as Mahāmudrā, he composed a treatise proving that emptiness is Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ Before Shang Tsalpa, the term white simple was not well known.
Shang wrote a treatise focused mainly on the white simple, and from then on, it was well known.
1️⃣ Thus, Marpa, Mila, Gampopa, and their disciples Phakmo Drupa, Drigung Jikten Sumgön of the Kyura, Lingrepa, Düsum Khyenpa, Taklungpa, and others agreed in their presentation of the view.
1️⃣ Theirs appears to be a system that placed importance on the appearance side, that is, dependent arising, and did not reject the analytical wisdom that cognizes particulars.
Nevertheless, many disciples, scholar and nonscholar alike, inserted confused notations into their collected works, so they do not seem to be reliable.
1️⃣ So my omniscient lama has stated.
1️⃣ Well, in a song that Jetsün Mila sang to Gampopa, it says: When realizing your own mind to be empty, Don’t be fettered to the one and the many: There’s danger of going into a nihilistic emptiness; Son, rest in the unelaborated nature.
1️⃣ How do we interpret this quote?
1️⃣ It means that when we have definitively established that the mind is empty of inherent existence and are settled one-pointedly on that empty nature, free from the one and the many, we do not analyze.
His statement “when realizing your own mind to be empty” shows where to cease analysis.
The Mahāmudrā of those in the early Kagyü is divided into two: sutra and mantra. I will first explain the former.
1️⃣ Settling one-pointedly on the nature of mind, you meditate nonconceptually and attain stability.
Your clear, aware mind, which is stabilized on the object of meditation thus attained, searches for the mind outside the body, inside the body, and so forth. After that, when you ascertain that mind is a non-true existent, in which you do not find a single nature, you settle one-pointedly on the nature of mind as characterized by non-true existence and meditate on emptiness as an affirming negation. So it is asserted.
1️⃣ The mantra-system Mahāmudrā is posited as the clear-light mind of great bliss that arises from having made the winds enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel.
That is the main subject matter of the famous seven yogic attainment texts and Saraha’s three essential works; it is the very quintessence of all the highest yoga tantras.
In order to meditate on that, you must first manifest the original mind.
1️⃣ For that, you must make the winds enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel.
Thus you establish the nature of the original mind and settle one-pointedly on that; the winds then enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel.
Then, through the ignition of the inner fire at the navel/secret area, the four joys arise, induced by the melting of the drop at the crown. Then the original mind arises in the nature of great bliss.
Settled one-pointedly in the bliss-emptiness gnosis — where that original mind and its object, emptiness, are inseparable — you successively traverse the four yogas and attain the supreme.
1️⃣ The Mahāmudrā meditation that thus unites bliss and emptiness, method and wisdom, is termed the white simple.
1️⃣ Practitioners of Mahāmudrā are twofold: those with sharp and those with dull faculties.
1️⃣ Those with dull faculties, who cannot meditate on the path that collects the winds in the central channel, will meditate for the time being on the perfection-system Mahāmudrā.
Persons with sharp faculties also are twofold.
If you have trained on the path already in previous lives, or earlier in this life, and from the start settle one-pointedly on the nature of mind, then through that meditation make the winds enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel so that you experience the original mind directly, you are called a simultaneist.
1️⃣ It says in The Epitome: The person who has progressed in training Is taught the simultaneist’s path.
1️⃣ And, it says in the Jeweled Stairway of Phakmo Drupa: The simultaneist person is a person who has: Collected the collections, Trained in the tantric training, Tamed the mind to be tamed, Gained the experience to be gained, and Become supreme.
1️⃣ This also is asserted by Jé Lama, when he says: “It seems that those skilled at making the winds enter the central channel make the winds enter the central channel regardless of the object on which they fix.”
If you have not already trained on the path in previous lives or earlier in this life, then the common paths, initiations, generation and completion stages, and so forth, must serve as preliminaries.
1️⃣ A person such as that is termed a gradualist.
In The Epitome, it says: A person with a beginner’s karma Is taught the gradualist’s path.
1️⃣ Later Kagyüpas: seeking the mind The later Kagyüpas assert many different ways of meditating on severing the root source of mind.
Some say that if you analyze during meditative equipoise how your own mind exists — as external or internal, or as arising, abiding, or ceasing — and see that it does not exist anywhere, that is severing the root source of the mind, that is identifying the mind, that is attaining the meaning of Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ They say that is the meaning of the quote from the Doha Treasure of Śavaripa: The mind and all appearances: If sought, they are not found, nor is there anywhere a seeker.
Nonexistent, unarisen in the three times, unceasing, That which does not change into something else Is the reality whose inherent nature is great bliss.
Therefore, all appearances are the dharmakāya.
Again, others say that when you seek the mind and see that mind does not exist as any part of your body, from your head to the soles of your feet, and does not exist as anything physical, like color, shape, and so forth, then that is seeing the real nature of the mind, and so forth.
1️⃣ They think thus because of the statement by Shang Rinpoché: The ultimate nature of your own mind, which is the seed of all, Appears as the gnostic dharmakāya, from the start indistinguishable From the mind of all the conquerors and their sons; It is not physical, it is naturally clear, It does not exist as a thing, and it is empty of color and size.
Still others say that, not pursuing a past awareness, not anticipating a future awareness, but settling serenely on the nature of the fresh, uncontrived present awareness, you plainly, directly see the nature of the mind, and at that time the root of the mind is severed and mind is identified.
1️⃣ This third view is taught in accord with such statements of Saraha as “put yourself at ease, fresh and uncontrived,” and of great adept Lingrepa: If you settle yourself in the uncontrived and fresh, then realization will dawn.
1️⃣ If you maintain that like a river’s flow, then wholeness will dawn.
Completely abandon all reference points and signs And always be in meditative equipoise, O yogin.
Still others say that, whatever objects appear to your mind — forms, sounds, and so forth — and also whatever concepts of good and bad arise — virtue and nonvirtue, and so forth — if you look at their nature plainly, without offering the slightest refutation or proof, they will disappear on their own.
1️⃣ After that, you settle in that empty, open blankness, in which there is no identification of anything; seeing like that is the realization of reality itself and identification of the mind.
1️⃣ This fourth group explains its view in accord with a passage that occurs in Tilopa’s Ganges Mahāmudrā Instruction: If you want to realize what’s beyond thought and inactive, Then sever your own mind at the root and rest in naked awareness.
1️⃣ Let the tainted water of conceptual thought clarify.
1️⃣ Don’t refute or prove appearances; leave them alone.
1️⃣ When there is no rejection or acceptance, that is Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ Also, a multitude of others say that any conceptual images that arise should not be released on their own but suppressed.
1️⃣ When, on top of that, they are suppressed even more, they are freed on their own, so appearance and freedom coincide.
However many conceptual thoughts there are, there are that many dharmakāyas.
1️⃣ This group teaches that that is the meaning of the saying by Lama Shang: When you have settled yourself like that, When a conceptual thought suddenly occurs, Do not think it is other than The clear-light dharmakāya.
Therefore, that projected conceptual thought Is emptiness projected from emptiness, Dharmakāya projected from dharmakāya, Union projected from union.
1️⃣ I have transcribed these statements verbatim from Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen’s Lamp Re-Illuminating Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ As indicated by the above, most of the later Kagyüpas’ written special instructions on seeking mind do not discuss the very subtle original mind; there is only an explanation of what appears when the coarse mind, naturally or impelled, thinks, “I go,” “I stay,” and so forth — that is, the way of seeking mind through the three: how the mind arises, abides, and ceases.
1️⃣ They intended or thought that, to accord with the mental capacity of students in degenerate times, meditators would establish just the actuality of the original ultimate nature of the present mind and get used to it, and then it would be easy to shift over to the very subtle original mind.
1️⃣ However, in some writings, there is a deliberate rejection of reasoning establishing an ultimate nature of mind that is other than its conventional nature; such lack of training in the major textual systems is deplorable.
1️⃣ Therefore my omniscient lama states: If you understand well, then even if you meditate only on the reasoning establishing absence of the one and many, there is no dearth of topics for meditation.
1️⃣ Therefore, those boasting that they view the very face of the dharmakāya in their own minds would obviously be better off if they studied just that reasoning and sat up straight.
There is still a great deal to be explained, but fearing prolixity, I have not written about it.
1️⃣ Early Kagyü arrangements of Mahāmudrā Some of the earlier Kagyüpas divided the Mahāmudrā path into four yogas: by meditating one-pointedly on mind, one-pointedness; by realizing mind to be unelaborated, nonelaboration; by realizing appearances and mind to be of a single taste, the single taste; and by the absence of meditation with signs, nonmeditation.
1️⃣ Those are the four.
1️⃣ In relation to the boundaries of the path stages, Jé Götsangpa explains basically that the first is devoted conduct the paths of accumulation and preparation, the second is the path of seeing the first bodhisattva stage, the third covers the second through seventh stages on the path of meditation, and the fourth is the pure stages of that path, the eighth through tenth.
1️⃣ Shang Rinpoché states: Mahāmudrā severs all at once, So the deluded are mistaken in counting stages and paths.
In order to please the deluded, though, The stages and paths of the definition vehicle Will be taken into account here.
1️⃣ His way of counting is asserted to be similar to Götsangpa’s.
Earlier Kagyüpas, established in their practice of the actual Mahāmudrā, saw the need for a multitude of indispensable techniques conducive to the arising of Mahāmudrā in the mental continuums of beginners, so they produced multiple enumerations of systems of guidance.
They guided disciples by instructing them in: Jé Gampopa’s yoga of the coemergent; Drigung Jikten Gönpo’s fivefold; and the eight great guidelines, the six about the taste of sameness, and mountain Dharma, taught by Tsangpa Gyarepa and others.
The yoga of the coemergent Of those, the meaning of yoga of the coemergent is as stated by the protector of beings, Phakmo Drupa: The three — mind, conceptual thoughts, and dharmakāya — First are coemergent, Then, through instruction, are joined into one.
It also is said: Mind itself is coemergent with the dharmakāya; Conceptual thoughts are the coemergent waves of the dharmakāya; Appearances are the coemergent light of the dharmakāya.
1️⃣ Appearances and mind are inseparably coemergent.
1️⃣ The meaning of the statement is explained as threefold: in light of an emphasis on devotion and disgust, there is the preliminary, that is, the four preparations, the actual, that is, the two-aspected identification, and the follow-up, that is, inner experience in relation to appearing objects.
1️⃣ Of these, the preliminary is the same as usual; the two aspects of the actual are tranquil abiding and superior insight.
The fivefold The fivefold is as taught by the world protector, Drigung Jikten Sumgön: Mahāmudrā is like a lion: If it is not fivefold, it is eyeless.
1️⃣ Because the fivefold is indispensable for the practice of Mahāmudrā, his promulgation of this instruction was a great deed for the Kagyü.
1️⃣ It is proclaimed in the world protector’s Root Song: The stallion of awakening mind: If you do not decide to race for the benefit of others, The crowds of gods and men will not approve, So apply your mind to the preliminaries.
1️⃣ Your own body as the royal deity body: If you do not hold to this firm, unchanging ground, The retinue of servant ḍākinīs will not gather, So apply yourself to generating your body as the divine yidam.
The snow mountain of the lama’s four bodies: If the sun of devotion does not appear, The flowing river of blessings will not arise from it, So apply your mind to this devotion.
The spacious sky of mind itself: If you do not clear away the clouds of conceptual thoughts, The planets and stars of the two knowledges will not shine, So apply yourself to this nonconceptual mind.
The wish-granting jewel of the two collections: If you do not wipe it clean with dedicatory prayer, The activities you need and desire will not occur, So afterward, apply yourself to this dedication of merits.
The five, then, are: meditation on the awakening mind, meditation on one’s own body as the deity, meditation on devotion to the lama, meditation on the nonconceptual view, and stamping with the seal of the dedication prayer.
1️⃣ The eight great guidelines The eight great guidelines are the guidelines on the lama as the three buddha bodies, the guidelines on love and compassion, the guidelines on equalizing the eight worldly dharmas, and the guidelines on meditation to reverse ill fortune through secret conduct.
The guidelines on cause and effect and dependent arising and the fivefold nectar drip are not counted among the six Dharmas of Chenga.
1️⃣ In place of those is what are called “the guidelines on cleansing the realms through pure vision.”
Thus, since there then would be only seven, either love and compassion are counted separately, or we must investigate further.
1️⃣ The meditation to reverse ill fortune through secret conduct is mainly just that conduct that enhances the path of the inner heat, and other practices.
1️⃣ The others are easy to understand.
1️⃣ The six about the taste of sameness are using conceptual thoughts as the path, using delusions as the path, using illness as the path, using gods and dré demons as the path, using suffering as the path, and using death as the path.
The first five of those use Mahāmudrā and the awakening mind as the path; using death as the path is an extension of the instruction on the bardo from among the six Dharmas of Nāropa.
The mountain Dharma is explained as “the four ornaments of the profound Dharma and that which is adorned by the oral instructions on the three spheres.”
The four ornaments are: the mountain Dharma, the source of good qualities, the great ship of the secret initiations, the hidden explanations of the vajra body, and the guidelines on the bardo.
1️⃣ The source of good qualities: it is the context of the yoga of the coemergent and the six Dharmas, which are the actual subject matter of meditation; it involves presentations of the characteristics of any meditation place, and of the three vows that are preliminary to the generation stage and completion stage.
The ship of initiation is a mandala ritual mainly taught in Kṛṣṇācārya’s Heruka system; moreover, there is much in it about the objects of meditation required for the yoga of the coemergent and the six Dharmas.
The hidden explanations establish the way things fundamentally exist.
1️⃣ The guidelines on the bardo are a commentary on the teaching Jetsün Milarepa gave to Tseringma on dividing the bardo into six.
1️⃣ The ornament of the oral instructions on the three spheres is threefold: the ornament of the direct guidelines on clearing hindrances, the ornament of the catalogue of the manifold spiritual songs, and the ornament of minor categories.
1️⃣ The first clears the hindrances to the earlier mountain Dharma teachings.
The main subject matter of the second is the six Dharmas and the yoga of the coemergent.
1️⃣ The last consists of miscellaneous sayings.
2️⃣ A brief analysis of views, and so forth: Is there a perfection-vehicle Mahāmudrā?
1️⃣ A brief analysis of views, and so forth: Quoting many sutras, the peerless Dakpo Rinpoché, Gampopa, wrote treatises to prove that, in the perfection-vehicle system, emptiness is said to be Mahāmudrā.
Although some say that those sutra passages do not appear in the Kangyur, those sutras do appear in the Kangyur that was translated into Chinese.
Although the words are not exactly the same, phrases with the same meaning appear in some other sutras translated into Tibetan, such as the Sutra on the Presence of the Present Buddha and others.
So my omniscient lama has stated.
1️⃣ Jamyang Sakya Pandita says in Distinguishing the Three Vows: Our Mahāmudrā Is the gnosis arising from initiation.
Relying on that passage, some say there is no term for Mahāmudrā in the sutra system.
1️⃣ I think it is unacceptable to say this, for it has been explained by many pandits, adepts, and scholars that superior, middling, and lesser perfection-vehicle students, abiding with a stable mind in tranquil abiding and superior insight, meditate on the nonduality of method and wisdom, which is Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ Jñānakīrti’s Distinguishing Clearly the Entire Sum of the Buddha’s Words says: Those with superior faculties who are especially diligent in the perfection vehicle, meditate on tranquil abiding and superior insight, and right from the time they are ordinary individuals, they have a perfect realization arising from Mahāmudrā; because of that, they obtain the signs of irreversibility.
1️⃣ Jñānakīrti also states in the same text: These superior students also meditate first on tranquil abiding and superior insight in order to enter the meditation preparatory to the nondual Mahāmudrā.
Not only that; the term Mahāmudrā is used for emptiness.
1️⃣ The King of Concentration Sutra says, “The intrinsic nature of all dharmas is Mahāmudrā.”
1️⃣ This point is taught in this and other passages.
1️⃣ If, then, it is objected that all four authenticating seals of the Buddhist view would then be Mahāmudrā, it is not like that: three of them — impermanence, suffering, and peace — seal only some objects, so they will not get the name “great,” while the selflessness of all dharmas seals all objects of knowledge, so it has the complete meaning of “great.”
2️⃣ Does the white simple imply quietism?
1️⃣ Although the objections raised in Jamgön Sapan’s Distinguishing the Three Vows cover many topics, the main ones appear to be two: the way Shang Tsalpa explains Mahāmudrā as the white simple, and the way the Drigungpas explain the single intention.
Echoing the statements of Sapan, many from our own Geluk and other schools have cast aspersions on those positions.
1️⃣ It seems that they all raise objections based on having decided that the meaning of Shang Tsalpa’s white simple is not thinking anything at all, but if you analyze Shang Tsalpa’s statements honestly and in detail, the position of not thinking anything at all clearly is not put forth, and it is evident that the objections in the Three Vows are rash statements.
2️⃣ Do Kagyü and Geluk have a single meaning?
1️⃣ A disciple of the omniscient Jamyang Shepa, the logician Losang Rinchen was at first a Gelukpa.
1️⃣ Later, he went to Mindröl Ling to study Sanskrit grammar.
1️⃣ He converted to Nyingma, and in a text full of careless statements arising from arrogance, Harmonizing the Stages of the Path Traditions, he wrote: In his Proving that the Kagyü and Geluk Have the Same Meaning, Khedrup Norsang Gyatso insults Sapan’s Distinguishing the Three Vows, and he states that in seeking the mind, in order to ascertain its non-true existence, the way to meditate is to take emptiness as an affirming negation, and so forth.
If he does not state this as a specially required skillful means, then his view accords with the Cittamātra way of meditating on emptiness as an affirming negation; and although that view is the intention of both the dharma lord Nyernyipa and the glorious Dharmakīrti, there still remains in the white simple the flaw that arousing the mind of awakening may or may not be necessary.
There is nothing to be heard in it about the common paths, nor is there any mention of the generation stage, and so forth, or the stages of maturing one’s mental continuum through the completion stage, or the vows and pledges to be assumed, and so forth.
1️⃣ To try to prove that both the white simple called the Mahāmudrā of abiding mind and the great synopsis of practice of the entire teaching of the Muni by the conqueror Tsongkhapa have a single meaning is absolutely ridiculous!
1️⃣ In Norsang’s Lamp Illuminating Mahāmudrā, however, it says: When the early Kagyüpas called their Mahāmudrā meditations the white simple, they meant that when the original mind arises in the nature of great bliss, we attain the ultimate result through that single meditation on the ultimate nature.
1️⃣ And: Thus, the early Kagyüpas describe Mahāmudrā meditation as the white simple.
Regarding that, Sapan asks in Distinguishing the Three Vows, “Is arousing the mind of awakening necessary or unnecessary in your white simple?”
His objection is just like the objection of someone who, when told the two collections are singly sufficient for buddhahood, asks, “Is being born from a mother first necessary or unnecessary?”
1️⃣ While Norsang’s text says this clearly, Losang Rinchen persists in saying that “there still remains in the white simple the flaw that arousing the mind of awakening may not be necessary.”
1️⃣ In writing that, he denies what is obvious.
1️⃣ Although Losang Rinchen derides the proof that the Kagyü and Geluk have the same meaning, in Norsang’s Lamp Illuminating Mahāmudrā, the early Kagyüpas’ way of meditating on Mahāmudrā is merely proved to be the way of meditating on the original mind as intended by Saraha; there is no phrase in the beginning, middle, or end of that work that attempts to establish that the Kagyü and Geluk have the same meaning.
1️⃣ Later printers, relying on writing that had been added to the cover, wrote the title as The Lamp Illuminating Mahāmudrā: Proving that the Kagyü and Geluk Have the Same Meaning, and it goes without saying that Losang Rinchen knew it thus.
1️⃣ Even if it happened that Norsang did prove that Kagyü and Geluk have the same meaning, when honest people investigate, they learn that there is not the slightest inconsistency between Norsang’s method of proof and the assertions of Jé Lama Tsongkhapa.
2️⃣ Therefore, Losang Rinchen is ridiculous, for his account is that of someone drunk on partiality, who says whatever comes to mind.
Are the four yogas Cittamātrin? As already noted above, Maitrīpa held the Madhyamaka view, yet Losang Rinchen says, “Apparently, Maitrīpa’s view is explained as the practice of the four yogas of the false-aspectarian Cittamātra of Śāntipa.”
1️⃣ Saying that Maitrīpa held a nonaspectarian Cittamātra view is nonsensical.
Therefore, my omniscient lama says, "Some earlier and later logicians say that Maitrīpa was a Cittamātrin because he was a disciple of Śāntipa.
1️⃣ The statement that Maitrīpa was a Cittamātrin is the same as a used toilet stone and should simply be thrown away."
1️⃣ Losang Rinchen also says: Since it is established that the Kagyü view of the four yoga stages - one-pointedness, nonelaboration, the single taste, and nonmeditation - is Śāntipa's way of meditating on the view, the Kagyü view is like the Cittamātra view.
1️⃣ Being totally unacquainted with the works of early Kagyüpas and thinking, "as long as there are four yoga stages, it must be Cittamātra," is jumping thoughtlessly to a conclusion.
My omniscient lama states: Although the term four yogas is explained by master Śāntipa as Cittamātra, it is not certain that the four yogas of the Kagyü are part of a Cittamātrin system.
The latter is as explained above.
2️⃣ Do the various types of Mahāmudrā have a single meaning?
1️⃣ The First Panchen, the omniscient Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen (1570-1662), states: The yoga of the coemergent, the joined amulet box, The fivefold, the taste of sameness, the four syllables, Shijé, Chö, Dzokchen, Guidelines on the Madhyamaka view, and others: Many names are applied to each, But when the experienced yogin, Expert in the definitive meaning of scripture and in reasoning, Analyzes them, they all come down to a single meaning.
Wishing to insult him, Losang Rinchen says: "Shijé, Chö, the fivefold, the six about single taste, and other practices are not solely philosophical views; his explanations are lightweight."
1️⃣ The Panchen also states: Although there are many ways of explaining The actual Mahāmudrā, It has two divisions, sutra and mantra.
1️⃣ The latter is the clear-light great bliss arising from skillful means, such as penetrating the vital points of the subtle body, and other completion-stage practices.
1️⃣ It is the Mahāmudrā of Saraha, Nāgārjunapāda, Nāropa, and Maitrīpa.
2️⃣ It is the very essence of the highest yoga tantra class, taught in the seven yogic attainment texts and the three essential texts of Saraha.
To this, Losang Rinchen says: “This is difficult to accept, unless it is for the purpose of converting fools.”
1️⃣ He also says, “The view of Dzokchen accords with the Sacred Words of Mañjuśrī by the great master Buddhaśrī Jñānapāda, so there are many reasons for seeing the Panchen’s basis of analysis as greatly problematic.”
1️⃣ Such statements are wanton gossip; they are mere biased chatter.
Did Tsongkhapa write the Inquiry into the Pure Noble Intention? The great pandit Jampa Lingpa and others explain that the text known as the Inquiry into the Pure Noble Intention is not a work of the great lord Jé Tsongkhapa, for in the middle of it there appear some vulgar phrases, such as “useless as shit.”
1️⃣ Also, the phrasing is not like the style in other works of Jé.
In the colophon, another name is written: “by one called Cared for by Guru Mañjughoṣa”; this name is not known to anyone.
Also, the Inquiry did not find its way into the index to the works of the omniscient Jé compiled by his disciples and grand-disciples, so there seem to be grounds for doubt.
1️⃣ However, most in our own Geluk and other schools count it as a text by Jé.
The questions were understood as refutations of the great Kagyü meditators, so Drukpa Pema Karpo and others wrote replies, and the Sakyapa Shākya Chokden, in reinforcing his defense of the Kagyüpas, wrote a reply mostly made up of invective.
1️⃣ From our own Geluk side, it seems that after Gomchen Ngawangpa wrote on the topic and, in particular, the omniscient First Panchen wrote his Reply to Questions: Sweet Words of Explanation for Those with Good Minds, it was assumed that the Inquiry was a text by Jé. Thus, it seems difficult to decide one way or the other.
1️⃣ Conclusion Among the Kagyüpas nowadays, it seems that, from minor lamas in a small corner of the monastery on up, no one produces even a single new rational critique.
1️⃣ They do write some miscellaneous texts on the three vows and, quoting one or two critical verses by the Kagyüpas and Drigung Palzin, they write many texts refuting the Nyingmapas; to do so is just to tire oneself out, and it’s essentially just a waste of paper and ink.
1️⃣ Therefore, to those who desire their own welfare, the omniscient Panchen says: The lives of āryas are beyond the purview of ordinary beings, and since the evil incurred by harming the Dharma and holy beings is extremely unbearable, may you cast away the hateful power of partiality, and may you be pervaded by jewel light of pure vision.
1️⃣ Thus do I, Chökyi Gyaltsen, pray.
1️⃣ It is fitting to hold in one’s heart what he so compassionately advised.
1️⃣ Concluding verses The medical elixir whose taste is freedom, mixing into one The white simple Mahāmudrā of Maitrīpa, The six excellent, deep Dharmas of Nāropa And the nectar of the Kadam mind training instructions Was given by the physician Gampopa To those with gradualist or simultaneist vessels, as appropriate.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, the Kagyü seers who achieved immortality Filled every glacier, ravine, and cultivated valley.
Flying about on wings of white cotton, They are mistaken for a flock of vultures in the sky, And the assembled host of the saffron-clad Is like the whole earth covered with ochre dust.
Indra, mightiest of gods, emanates his thousand eyes To gaze on that wondrous mass; not only that, But oceans of conquerors in untold buddhafields Rise to view it from the dharmadhātu, or so I imagine.
For those lacking the fortune to be freed By seeing events of the past such as those, I have related here an account to establish Something meaningful for those with ears to hear.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation of the history of the Kagyü philosophical system.
1️⃣ The Shijé Tradition.
1️⃣ I will relate the origins of the philosophical system known as Shijé, The ocean of instructions in which the great rains Of the pacification of suffering, thrice fallen because of The Indian Dampa’s concern for Tibet, mingle into one.
2️⃣ THE HISTORY of the Shijé philosophical system is twofold: a. The actual history of the Shijé philosophical system and b. The history of one of its schools, the Chö system.
1️⃣ a. The actual history of the Shijé philosophical system Meaning of the term.
According to earlier scholars, the word Shijé was applied on the basis of the name of the Dharma teaching called “the holy Dharma that pacifies suffering.”
This Dharma is called “the holy Dharma that pacifies suffering” because it instantly pacifies the sufferings of this life — namely, having an inferior body, being sickly, being poor, and being oppressed by nonhumans — which arose through the karma of previous lives, and enables you to endure the practice of yoga.
1️⃣ That alone, however does not cover it: the practice of the perfection of wisdom pacifies all the sufferings of becoming and peace, so it also is designated Shijé because the essence of the instruction is the practice of the perfection of wisdom.
Were it nothing more than just the alleviation of fleeting negative circumstances, it would not be an extraordinary instruction.
It also is claimed that it is designated thusly on the basis of the phrase, “the mantra that completely pacifies all suffering.”
Major figures The source from which the instruction arose was Pha Dampa Sangyé. He was born in Kūpadvīpa, in the region of Carasiṃha, in southern India.
Because it was his seventh birth, he was unstained by vice and naturally enjoyed virtue.
Right from childhood, he trained to the point of mastery in countless sciences, such as grammar.
1️⃣ He took preliminary ordination from the abbot of Vikramaśīla, Kṣemadeva, vows for arousing the mind of awakening from Guru Serlingpa, and initiations from many gurus, so that he held all three sets of vows.
He received countless instructions from fifty-four male and female adepts: eleven gurus for dialectics and grammar, eleven gurus for moving winds according to the father tantras, eleven gurus for experiencing bliss according to the mother tantras, eleven gurus for the signs of Mahāmudrā, and ten gurus for identifying awareness.
In the enumeration of these gurus, there seems to be some inconsistency in the time periods in which those enumerated lived: Indrabhūti, Nāgārjuna, and others came much earlier than Pha Dampa, and some came in a later era.
I wonder whether Dampa might not have lived a very long life: my omniscient lama says that it is apparently true, since it seems from some Chinese accounts that Dampa was a disciple of the protector Nāgārjuna.
When Dampa meditated in various places over sixty-five years, he had countless visions of the twelve meditational deities, and so forth, and a vision of the thirty-six gurus of the wondrous ḍākinī realm.
3️⃣ He gained the common yogic achievements: the eye medicine, speed walking, magic pills, penetration of matter, control of demonesses, the magic sword, and flying.
1️⃣ He attained the supreme yogic achievement, the gnosis of the great path of seeing.
1️⃣ He practiced tantric conduct in the twenty-four power places and elsewhere. Renowned as an adept, he was called by various names.
He went to Tibet five times; the fifth time, he went from Tibet to China and became famous there.
From among the countless disciples he developed in Tibet, the most famous are those of the three lineages — the early, middle, and later Shijé.
It is said that the early lineage was taught to the Kashmiri Jñānaguhya and translated into Tibetan by Ongpo Lotsāwa.
The middle lineage is said to have been propagated after Pha Dampa gave instructions to the trio of Ma Chökyi Sherap, Sochung Gendün Bar, and Kham Yeshé Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ The later lineage: Dampa went to holy Dingri Langkor; of his four supreme disciples there — the holy Charchen, Charchung, Vajrakrodha, and the holy Künga — the main one was the holy Künga, whom Dampa Sangyé had looked after over the course of five lives.
In this lifetime, he became the treasury of instruction, so many upholders of the tradition came after him: his disciple Patsap Gompa, then Gyalwa Tené, Rok Sherap Sengé, Shikpo Nyima Sengé, and others.
1️⃣ Then Shijé became widespread. Major instructions I will mention just the names of the instructions of those three lineages.
a) Early Shijé The first lineage includes the three cycles of the lamp of pacification, the sādhana of Yamāntaka, and others.
2️⃣ b) Middle Shijé: Ma The middle lineage includes the Ma, So, and Kam systems, along with minor instructions.
1️⃣ The Dharma cycle of Ma is twofold: the word lineage and the meaning lineage.
1️⃣ Of those, the guidelines on meaning are the sixteen handed-down guidelines, while the word instructions include arousing the mind of awakening, teachings on emptiness, miscellaneous sayings, harsh truths, and extensive conclusions.
1️⃣ c) Middle Shijé: So The Dharma instructions of the So system are reckoned as twofold: the word lineage and the meaning lineage.
Of these, the word lineage has the great lineage and the small lineage.
The great lineage relates to a hundred and three supreme, holy persons: the fifty-four great, the thirty-two middle, and the seventeen lesser.
It contains accounts of each adept, the essence of his or her instruction, and each adept’s complete system for guiding disciples, so it is said to consist of the fifty-four lineages or the hundred and three lineages; that is why it is called the great lineage.
The small lineage contains thirty-two classes of Dharma instructions: the five about meaning, the four stages, the long and short sessions on mental absorption, the eight renowns, the trio of the father and two sons, the faulty and the faultless, and others.
1️⃣ The meaning lineage includes the partial and the impartial.
The former has: the fifty-four meaning lineages of the fifty-four male and female yoga practitioners, the thirty-two meaning lineages of the thirty-two gurus, and the seventeen meaning lineages of the seventeen holy ones.
1️⃣ The impartial-meaning lineage has the cycle on opening the eye and the cycle of the ḍākinī.
The first of those is fivefold, consisting of the four sons and the mother: opening the eye on the hidden text is the mother, and its branches are the four sons — the instruction on time and temporal divisions, the hundred and six identifications, incessant purity, and the secret path of Vajrasattva.
1️⃣ The second impartial-meaning lineage, the cycle of the ḍākinīs, includes the four great headings of the So cycle: (1) for achieving the supreme, the cycle on signs; (2) for gaining ordinary yogic achievements, the cycle on the four syllables; (3) for achieving both, the cycle on dzagata and (4) the cycle on the session. (
1️⃣ 1) The cycle on signs consists of the cycle on the signs of Heruka; the cycle on the signs of the Sugata; the cycle on the signs of Vajraghaṇṭa; and the miscellaneous signs of Pha Dampa. (
1️⃣ 2) For gaining the ordinary yogic achievements, there is the body sādhana of the white Vārahī, the speech sādhana of the red Vārahī, and the mind sādhana of the black Vārahī.
1️⃣ The last consists of the sādhana of Vajravārahī’s dharmakāya, the sādhana of her enjoyment body, and the sādhana of her emanation body.
1️⃣ The cycle on dzagata is the single wheel of inner heat.
1️⃣ The cycle on the session is the path of tantric conduct and the system for the development of inner experience.
The essential roots of those, as it were, are the four ear-whispered lineages. Mawai Sengé’s meaning lineage, whose Dharma language corresponds with that of tantra.
The fourth lineage, a completely unknown meaning lineage whose Dharma language does not correspond with that of tantra.
The brief summary of the incomplete chapters.
2️⃣ So’s entering straight into awareness.
1️⃣ Middle Shijé: Kam The Kam system is the explanation by Kam Yeshé Gyaltsen of all eight higher realizations according to the instructions of Pha Dampa.
1️⃣ He expounded them by quoting from the extensive and medium-length perfection of wisdom sutras and from their poetic distillation.
Thus, there were two lineages of disciples, upper and lower.
The upper lineage was transmitted from the duo of Khön Wangchuk Dorjé and Gyamé Sherap Lama.
1️⃣ At first, both of them were sickly, but Kam used their illnesses to introduce them to the nature of mind.
1️⃣ He taught the first chapter of the Ornament of Higher Realization as the basic text, the four noble truths as instruction, and miscellaneous texts as praxis.
Later, Gyatön Shönu Sengé wrote down the instructions of the Kam system in a text called the Miraculous Key to Syllogism: The Precious Garland of the Mind Lineage of the Perfection of Wisdom and the Ear-Whispered Lineage of Praxis.
1️⃣ The lower lineage: Kam transmitted it to Dro Chötsön by distinguishing between gradualist persons and simultaneist persons — identifying them in terms of both essential meaning and higher realization — and explaining all the sutras by way of the four steps of dependent arising.
1️⃣ The lower lineage was the instruction that focused on meditation.
2️⃣ Middle Shijé: Minor and miscellaneous lineages.
1️⃣ The minor lineages that occur in the middle Shijé are the three systems of Drapa, Ché, and Jang.
1️⃣ Pha Dampa gave Geshé Drapa the instruction on the cycle of the nine lamps of pacification: the Lamp of the Body Instruction, the Lamp of the Speech Vehicle, the Lamp of Secret Mind, the Lamp of Pure View, the Lamp of Precious Meditation, the Lamp of Enlightened Conduct, the Lamp of Basic Equanimity, the Lamp of the Yoga Path, and the Lamp of the Ultimate Result.
1️⃣ Dampa gave Ché Candrakīrti the instruction on the combination of sutra and tantra — the perfection-vehicle instruction based on joining the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom with the Litany of the Names of Mañjuśrī, and the mantra-vehicle instruction of the fifty-eight male and female adepts.
1️⃣ He gave Jang Kadampa the instruction on the unwritten perfection of wisdom; it was said to be no more than a faulty introduction.
1️⃣ The miscellaneous lineages: Dampa gave to Drogom the golden spoon explaining the Litany of the Names of Mañjuśrī; to Gugom the instructions on the action seal; to Chugom the instruction on the frank talk from the heart; to Gompa Margom the instruction on the three types of single stroke; to Nyak Lotsāwa the instruction on the solitary hero Heruka; to Chemo Paldrönma the sixteen-section Dharma of the experience of the adepts; to Nyaltö Ngorjé Gompa the yoga of the coemergent; to the elder from Chubar, Jungdrak, the instruction on the perfection of wisdom sutras; to Ngakshé Sherap Gyaltsen the instruction on Kālacakra; to Shangpa Udep the instruction on the four syllables; to Gyatön Kyitsek from Nyemo the instruction on Hevajra; to Shangsak Chungwa the secret practice of Vajravārahī; to Lama Gönkarwa the instruction on Vajrapāṇi; to Ben Gungyal of Kyishö the ear-whispered lineage of Heruka; and to Machik Lapdrön the instruction on Chö.
2️⃣ This concludes the discussion about the middle lineage.
1️⃣ Later Shijé The Dharmas of later lineages are given the name the cycle of practical guidance on the stainless drop of Mahāmudrā.
1️⃣ This Mahāmudrā is precisely the Mahāmudrā of Maitrīpa, for Pha Dampa Sangyé was a direct disciple of Maitrīpa. “
1️⃣ Stainless” is what Dampa’s texts are called. “
1️⃣ Practical guidance” is the term for that which has a way of practice a little different from other teachings.
1️⃣ So its nature is said to be perfection-vehicle instructions in conformity with secret mantra.
The Commentary on the Ten Principles of Maitrīpa says: That system is the perfection vehicle but has a mode of conduct that conforms with secret mantra like that explained in the Hevajra.
Since it does not rely on deity yoga and does not follow the four seals, it is not secret mantra.
This seems to accord with the statements above.
1️⃣ This explanation is given in terms of what is commonly known, but it also is reported that Pha Dampa gave the Kālacakra initiation to Charchen and Ben Gungyal, and that he also bestowed instructions on the action seal on many disciples, so it is not the case that secret mantra is entirely nonexistent in Pha Dampa’s pacification of suffering tradition.
His own explanations are in conformity with secret mantra, so the vowel-and-consonant blessing and other practices are in conformity with secret mantra.
1️⃣ The actual vowel-and-consonant blessing is not secret mantra and should not be mistaken for it, for it is merely similar to the explanation of the dhāraṇī of forty-two syllables in the perfection of wisdom sutras themselves.
This Dharma cycle has two sections: the common Dharma and the uncommon Dharma.
1️⃣ The common Dharma consists of: the sutras and tantras, along with their ritual practices; the special oral tradition, along with the ear-whispered lineage; the stainless, along with the subtle drop; and the cloth filter, along with the manifold explanations.
1️⃣ The first, the sutras and tantras, along with their ritual practices, consists of the general sutra, The Sutra of the Waterfall’s Play; the special sutra, the Heart Sutra; the general tantra, Illuminating the Collections; and the special tantra, the Great Waterfall.
The ritual practices are the great and medium circles of initiation and the three versions of the stages of the path — the great, medium, and small.
1️⃣ The special oral tradition, along with the ear-whispered lineage, consists of the four special oral traditions and the four ear-whispered lineages that extend that path.
1️⃣ The stainless, along with the subtle drop: the stainless is the six that includes the cycle on the root penetrating the Dharma, and so forth; the subtle drop is the instruction on obstructions causing unhappiness given when Patsap Gompa requested it from Künga.
1️⃣ The cloth filter, along with the manifold explanations: The cloth filter is the eight that includes the direct instruction about nectar and so forth, consisting of occasional talks by Patsap that were written down by Tené.
The manifold explanations are the explanations written by Tené, Shikpo, Nyemdopa, and others.
The uncommon Dharma class consists of: tantras, along with teachings on emptiness; initiations, along with guidance on the path; the three secret treasuries; and the eight manuals.
The three secret treasuries are the guru secret treasury, the meditational deity secret treasury, and the ḍākinī secret treasury.
1️⃣ The second comprises the five path cycles, namely: Virūpa’s path cycle of the four doors of the path of means, Saraha’s path cycle of the four spheres of the path of means, Serlingpa’s eightfold path cycle, Āryadeva’s eightfold path cycle, and Nāropa’s path cycle on the four unions.
1️⃣ The eight manuals are: the Manual of the Profound Initiation, the Manual of the Root Identification, the Manual of the Guidelines of the Ear-Whispered Lineage, the Manual of the Vital Points of the Four Doors, the Manual of the Various Magical Powers, the Manual of the Profound Mantra, the Manual of the Ḍākinī Doctrine-Protector, and the Manual of the Three-Part Royal Special Instruction.
1️⃣ These make up the uncommon Dharma class, which has the seal of secrecy.
1️⃣ The essence of Shijé The essence of the Shijé Dharma: It is the activation of the stages of the path of the perfection of wisdom, a little-known special instruction for putting into practice the entire meaning of the three perfection of wisdom sutras, the extensive, medium-length, and condensed.
1️⃣ Generally, Pha Dampa Sangyé mastered six special oral traditions of the lineage of the perfection of wisdom: the lineage from Tuṣita heaven, the lineage from the land of the nāgas, the lineage from Uḍḍiyāna, the lineage from Bengal in eastern India, the lineage from Bhetala in the south, and the lineage from Bhiṣokotacandana in the south.
1️⃣ The special instruction for putting into practice the path of the perfection of wisdom, which shows the distillation of the essential meaning of the six special oral traditions, was given by Buddha Dīpaṃkara to Śākyamuni, who gave it to Ānanda.
Then, when it had passed through thirty-six lineage holders, up to Bhikṣu Siṃha, a malevolent king cut the line of succession.
Then, Ārya Asaṅga, knowing that Maitreya had received the instruction directly from Śākyamuni, performed the practice of Maitreya and had a vision of him; after hearing the perfection of wisdom instruction directly, he gave them to his younger brother, Vasubandhu.
1️⃣ The latter gave the instruction to Pha Dampa’s maternal uncle, Āryadeva, who gave the instruction to Pha Dampa.
So it is explained.
Since that instruction condenses the meaning of the Mother sutras for practice according to the special instructions of the treatise called the Ornament of Higher Realization, it is a wonderful explanation.
How that is so cannot be shown in a few words. If I explained it extensively, it would be far too much, so I have not written about it in detail here.
Although the stream of explanation lasted for a long time, it has now apparently been cut.
1️⃣ Sources of the Shijé view The source of the Shijé view: It reaches back to the wisdom-oriented sutras, while in literature on instructions, Nāgārjuna is taken as authoritative.
1️⃣ Also, in Dampa’s Eighty Verses for the People of Dingri, it says: Whirl the spear of awareness into the empty nature.
1️⃣ O people of Dingri, your view is unobstructed.
1️⃣ Because the view that is taught is free of extremes, I think it is coextensive with the Madhyamaka view.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that, in the writings of later generations, there often is an admixture of fish and turnips.
1️⃣ In earlier times, beings beyond number became adepts based on this Shijé philosophical system.
The two most famous teaching centers, founded by Kyemchok Samten Pal, were Yap Chöding and Gomo Chöding.
1️⃣ Following Kyemchokpa, Jangsempa and Guru Könshön presided, respectively, over the two main monasteries.
1️⃣ It appears that the Dharma lord Dönrinpa, a mentor of Jé Tsongkhapa, also received instruction from Kyemchokpa.
1️⃣ Nowadays, apart from the mere transmission of miscellaneous instructions such as the Sanskrit alphabet, the blessings of the essence of dependent arising, the permission ceremony of Mahādeva Aṃghora, and the medicine bag, and except for the books containing the most important instructions, which just sit there, all the Dharma streams of the Shijé instruction have apparently disappeared.
1️⃣ One of the Shijé schools, the Chö system Etymology The meaning of the term Chö: it is applied by way of the function of the instruction.
It is designated as it is because the selfish attitude is severed by love, compassion, and the awakening mind; the root of samsara is severed by the view of emptiness; and the four māras are severed by both in common.
It also is known as “conduct” because the practices of the children of the Conqueror, the bodhisattvas, are conducted on the path of method and wisdom.
1️⃣ This instruction also arose initially from Pha Dampa Sangyé.
When Pha Dampa came to Tibet for the third time and was in Tsang, he gave the Chö instruction to both Kyotön Sönam Lama and Yarlung Mara Serpo.
1️⃣ Mara Serpo gave the instruction to his attendant, Nyönpa Serong, who gave it to both Tsetön and Sumtön Rechen.
Tsetön gave it to Nyentön, and Sumtön gave it to Kalden Semo, who gave it to Tsangtön, who gave it to Nyentön, and so forth.
1️⃣ What extended from them is called the male Chö lineage.
1️⃣ Kyotön Sönam Lama gave the instruction to Machik Lapdrön; thenceforth, that lineage was known as the female Chö lineage.
Machik Lapkyi Drönma was prophesied by the Blessed One in the Mañjuśrī Root Tantra and other scriptures.
A gnosis ḍākinī, she came in the form of a human female and made the Chö instruction pervade all of Tibet.
Machik had some sons and daughters; there seem to be conflicting ways of reckoning them in the chronicles.
As for Thönyön Samdrup, some explain that he was the son of Machik; others assert that he was her nephew or grand-nephew, but in most of the reliable narratives, he is regarded as her son. In any case, Machik became a great adept and had twenty-one male and female disciples who were adepts, eighteen daughters who were adepts, and so forth.
From them, the instructions spread extensively.
Although Machik Lapdrön had what are called the four supreme disciples, the stream of the instruction spread most from the lineage of Khugom Chöseng.
1️⃣ It has persisted without decline right up to the present day.
Later, there also were some Chö instructions that were revealed as treasures.
1️⃣ Gyalthangpa Samten Öser met Machik in a pure vision, and she gave him the Gyalthang system, and she gave Tokden Natsok Rangdröl the profound path ear-whispered lineage, and so forth.
A multitude of lineages spread thusly. In the Dharma cycle of Mañjughoṣa, there is a special instruction on the blessing of the Black Lady of Wrath combined with Chö, which was bestowed on the conqueror, the great Tsongkhapa, by Mañjughoṣa. Transmitted successively from the conqueror Ensapa, that same instruction is nowadays widespread in our own Geluk party.
The essence of the Chö instruction is practice of the perfection of wisdom that is in conformity with mantra.
1️⃣ All scholars and adepts agree that the source of the instruction is the Mother sutras — the extensive, medium-length, and condensed perfection of wisdom sutras — especially the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom.
1️⃣ The Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom specifically says: There are four causes whereby strong and skillful bodhisattvas Cannot be moved and are hard for the four māras to control: They abide in the empty and do not at all let go of sentient beings; They do as they are told and have the blessings of the sugatas.
The four causes stated are: abiding in the empty, not letting go of sentient beings, doing as they are told, and being blessed by the sugatas.
The first of those is meditating on the view of emptiness, and the second is meditating on love, compassion, and the awakening mind.
These two are the actual practice of pacification Chö.
1️⃣ The third cause is relying on a virtuous friend, the root of the path; and the fourth is going for refuge, visualizing the field of assembly, the seven limbs, and offering the mandala.
These two are the preliminaries to the practice of pacification Chö.
Hard for the four māras to control” refers to the decisive test, and the instruction about “strong and skillful bodhisattvas” refers to the practice of method by the bodhisattva who has the strength to overcome the sorrows of becoming and peace.
Thus it is taught.
1️⃣ You may wonder how this is in conformity with mantra.
The Hevajra states: It is explained that it is good to meditate Under a single tree, in a cemetery, In the house of a mother deity, at night, And also in a solitary hermitage.
And it also says: Having given the gift of your body, Conduct yourself perfectly on the outside.
1️⃣ And it says: Surely, even if some titan Or one such as Indra comes before you, You should not concern yourself with that, And instead roam like a lion.
1️⃣ The Chö instruction is in accord with these statements, because those scriptural passages teach, successively, the place to practice, the way to practice, as well as how, having practiced, you arouse confidence and undergo the ultimate test of Chö.
The view: Since the source of the instruction comprises the trio of the extensive, medium-length, and condensed Mother sutras, as well as their verse summary, it is coextensive with the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka.
1️⃣ Although this is the case in texts that are definitely Machik Lapdrön’s, it seems that in the interim, upholders of the instruction who did not know how to expound her view as it really was mixed in various types of discourse, and because Chö spread impartially to various philosophical systems, explanations of the view and the way to meditate arose according to the dictates of each of the philosophical systems.
1️⃣ Concluding verses The one who had no conceptual thoughts — of anything whatsoever — The one who danced emanations — whatever disciplined beings — The one who performed countless acts — whatever was appropriate — The one who granted yogic achievements — whatever was desired: He who was renowned as old father Dampa Sangyé Taught the countless fathers of the Land of Snows The essence of the path of the perfections And the ultimate special instructions of the father and mother tantras.
1️⃣ The distilled intention of every adept, This supreme medicine, the holy Dharma combining every virtue, Is called the pacifier of the suffering of every being; In a single voice, it is praised by every sage.
In conformity with the way of Atiśa, The supreme instruction for meditating on nonproduction, the meaning of the syllable a, Is this Chö instruction of mother Lapgyi Drönma.
1️⃣ Aho! I think it is the quintessence of Mahayana Dharma.
1️⃣ In the vast forest of manifold philosophical systems, This account of the history of Shijé Is music from the throat of the cuckoo, A great delight to the ear.
3️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation the history of the Shijé philosophical system.
1️⃣ The Sakya Tradition I will relate the history of the philosophical system known as the Sakya, In which every portion of the sutra and tantra classes is complete, And which possesses the glorious quality of opening the water lily of the Muni’s teaching With the white light of stainless explanation and practice.
1️⃣ THE HISTORY of the glorious Sakya philosophical system is threefold: a. A general history of the Sakya philosophical system, b. In particular, how the principal Dharmas — Lamdré and other teachings — came about, and c. A presentation of the Sakya view.
1️⃣ a. A general history of the Sakya philosophical system The widely renowned Sakya arose from Khön Könchok Gyalpo.
1️⃣ The family lineage of Khön sprang from the luminous gods.
Chiring, Yuring, and Yusé were the three sky-god ancestors, so from there down to Yapang Kyé it is known as the sky-god lineage.
1️⃣ Yapang Kyé destroyed the srin demon Kyareng Trakmé and married the demon’s consort, Yadruk Pilima. From that union a son was born, and because he was born from conflict between Yapang Kyé and the srin demon, he was known as Khönbar Kyé, “Born amid Conflict.”
Thenceforth, the successive family lineage was known as the Khön clan.
1️⃣ Down to Khön Palpoché (eighth century), those who came in the lineage were exclusively possessed of good temperament from having divine lineage and the glory of powerful merit and were especially distinctive compared to ordinary beings.
Palpoché’s son, Khönlü Wangpo Sungwa, was the wisest of the seven trial monks who took preliminary vows from the great preceptor Śāntarakṣita; he served Master Padmasambhava and received instructions from him.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, until Khönrok Sherap Tsültrim, the members of the family lineage only practiced Nyingma secret mantra.
1️⃣ Khön Könchok Gyalpo In Kharok’s time, a man named Khön Könchok Gyalpo, an expert in all mantra-vehicle and definition-vehicle subjects, saw many tantric yogins in the middle of the market wearing the masks of the powerful goddesses and performing dances.
2️⃣ He reported this to his elder brother, the lama Khönrok Sherap Tsültrim.
His elder brother said: Now is the time of what is called “corrupt secret mantra.”
From now on, no one meeting the criteria of an adept will emerge through Tibet’s old secret-mantra translation school, the Nyingma, and what we have of them we will hide as treasures.
I am old now and you are young. In Mugu Lung lives an expert teacher known as Drokmi Lotsāwa Shākya Yeshé; go there and study the new translations of secret mantra.
1️⃣ When Khönrok Sherap Tsültrim erected three great stupas and inserted into them all the Nyingma images, texts, and sacred substances, the wrath and magical power of the Dharma protectors were apparent, so he removed a few texts on the Dharma cycle of Vajrakīla, the torma rituals of the deities Karmo Nyida Brother and Sister, and other texts and gave them to his younger brother.
Then Khön Könchok Gyalpo went to Drokmi and studied the later translations of secret mantra.
1️⃣ Moreover, he took on many gurus who were scholar-adepts, such as Gö Lotsāwa Khukpa Lhetsé, the Kashmiri pandit Hangdu Karpo, Ma Lotsāwa Rinchen Chok, Dzinpa Lotsāwa, and others.
1️⃣ He examined the land on Pönpo Mountain and, seeing that it was good, founded a monastery on the mountainside in an area where the earth was white.
1️⃣ From then on, the tradition was known as Sakya, Gray-White Earth.
1️⃣ Sachen Künga Nyingpo Khön Könchok Gyalpo’s son, Sachen Künga Nyingpo, received many Dharma instructions from Bari Lotsāwa Rinchen Drak.
1️⃣ When he practiced the meditation of Mañjughoṣa, he had a direct vision in which Mañjughoṣa bestowed upon him the perfection of wisdom instructions on freedom from the four attachments, and so forth.
Over the next four years, he received teachings on abhidharma from Drangti Darma Nyingpo, on Madhyamaka and valid cognition from Khyung Rinchen Drakpa and Mé Lhangtsor, on Guhyasamāja and the Dharma cycle of the protective nyen demon from Nam Khaupa, on Hevajra from Gyichuwa Dralha Bar, instructions on Heruka and the protector Mahākāla from Gungthangpa Mal Lotsāwa, teachings on Heruka from Puhrang Lotsāwa, and so forth, and in particular, he received instructions on the Lamdré oral-instruction tradition from Shangtön Chöbar.
1️⃣ From the great adept Birapa, or Virūpa, who came to Sakya bringing the Dharma to the doorstep, he received in general the instructions on the seventy-two tantras, and in particular the four profound Dharmas not allowed outside the monastery fence and other practices.
1️⃣ In short, he was given to satiation the nectar of the profound key points of the short lineage of oral instruction.
He first taught the oral instruction to Aseng of Kham, and when he committed it to writing, it became known as the Text Explanation for Aseng.
1️⃣ Sachen had a life story beyond imagining: he had a direct vision of the deity Mañjughoṣa, he cared for students by displaying six different magical emanations at once, and so forth.
1️⃣ He was reputed to be an emanation of Avalokiteśvara.
He had disciples: the three who attained the supreme, the seven who attained forbearance, the eighty realizers, the eleven heart sons who upheld the text-explanation tradition, the seven heart sons who commented on the Vajra Verses, and others.
1️⃣ Sachen demonstrated nirvana in this realm and acted for the sake of beings after death through four bodily forms in four pure lands: Sukhāvatī, Potala, Uḍḍiyāna, and Suvarṇa in the north, where it is said he still abides.
1️⃣ Sons of Sachen Sachen had four sons: Künga Bar, Sönam Tsemo, Drakpa Gyaltsen, and Palchen Öpo.
The first, Künga Bar, went to India and died in Magadha.
1️⃣ The second, master Sönam Tsemo studied Madhyamaka and the perfection of wisdom for seven years with Chapa Chökyi Sengé.
1️⃣ Before the age of sixteen, he severed superimposition with respect to the tantras and the special instructions.
He had direct visions of many higher deities.
2️⃣ When living at the monastic seat, he gave instructions on the oral-instruction tradition to many disciples, so there were many who followed his philosophical system.
Finally, while preaching the Dharma, he passed on to Sukhāvatī from atop his instruction throne with the manifestation of limitless bodily forms, divine music, and other signs.
1️⃣ Jetsün Drakpa Gyaltsen took the lay celibacy vow from Jangsem Dawa Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ His life was like that of an ordained person: not partaking of meat, beer, and so forth.
1️⃣ Once, he dreamed that he was given three tantric texts. From then on, he comprehended the real nature of all dharmas.
1️⃣ When he was eleven years old, he taught the Saroruha sādhanas of Hevajra; his explanation was very valuable, and everyone was amazed.
Up to the age of twelve, he received many Dharma instructions from his father, Sachen.
1️⃣ Even after his father passed away, the latter displayed his gnosis body in a vision and taught the elucidation of the meaning of symbols, known as the very short lineage of Lamdré.
1️⃣ He promised that in a later rebirth, Drakpa Gyaltsen would go to Sukhāvatī, and then, having become the wheel-turning king Countless Qualities in Suvarṇa, he would gain the supreme yogic achievement.
1️⃣ He had many disciples. His holy heart son was Jamyang Sapan himself.
Moreover, there were the eight famous men, the four men who requested adornment by the Vajra Tent, the four great ordainees, and others.
The fourth son of Sachen, Palchen Öpo, had two sons: the elder was Sakya Panchen Künga Gyaltsen, or Sapan, and the younger was Sangtsa Sönam Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ Sakya Pandita Sapan spoke the Sanskrit language as soon as he was born.
From Jetsün Drakpa Gyaltsen, he received teachings on all the profound key points of sutra and mantra, the distillation of the instructions of the earlier Sakyapas.
1️⃣ In dreams, he received teachings on the Treasury of Higher Knowledge from the supreme sage Vasubandhu and adamantine songs from the great Kashmiri pandit, Śākyaśrī.
1️⃣ He requested the transmission cycle of the five Dharmas of Maitreya and other teachings from Shudön Dorjé Kyap, instructions on valid cognition from Maja Jangtsön and Tsurtön Shönseng, instructions on philosophical systems from Tsekpa Wangchuk Sengé, and various instructions from Chiwo Lhepa Jangchup Ö. At the age of twenty-three, he met the great Kashmiri pandit.
1️⃣ With the great pandit and his disciples, Saṅghaśrī, Sugataśrī, and Dānaśīla, he trained completely in the ten sciences: the five major sciences of grammar, valid cognition, medicine, arts and technology, and Buddhism; and the five minor sciences of poetry, lexicography, poetics, metrics, and drama.
At the age of twenty-seven, he took full ordination from the great Kashmiri pandit.
1️⃣ He wrote the Treasure of Knowledge and Distinguishing the Three Vows, refuting countless debased propositions and debased views.
In Kyirong, he vanquished six debased opponents with his reasoning, the main one being Haridrāyaṇa, a South Indian extremist, and because he introduced them to the teaching, his renown pervaded the land.
In 1247, he was invited to Mongolia by the Mongol khan, Godan, and he spread the teachings on explanation and practice in that land.
1️⃣ At the age of seventy, he withdrew his form body.
It is said that in his next rebirth, he went to the ḍākinī realm, and then, in Mumuni in the east, he became the son of the king Nyima Tophel and traversed most of the stages and paths; after that, he became enlightened in the Abhirati buddhafield and was called Sugata Vimalaśrī.
1️⃣ This is just a brief account; more may be learned from the biographical literature.
His disciples included: the three upholders of the lineage of realizations; the two upholders of the lineage of special instructions; the three upholders of the lineage of explanation; the thirteen elder children of the vow; the seven youths; the four great translators; the four hidden yogins; the four learned and righteous heart sons; the upholder of the practice lineage, the conqueror Yangönpa; the hidden great adept Sangtsa Sönam Gyaltsen; and others.
All of them lived lives beyond imagining, and through each, the number of disciples and grand-disciples increased manyfold.
2️⃣ Phakpa and his successors The Dharma Lord Sapan’s younger brother, Sangtsa Sönam Gyaltsen, had two sons: the protector of beings, the Dharma king Phakpa and his younger brother, the protector of beings Chakna.
1️⃣ As soon as Phakpa was born, Sapan said, “He will become someone especially distinctive compared to others.
1️⃣ Because he was born in the sheep year, name him Phakpa Lukyé.”
1️⃣ When Phakpa was three years old, he recited the sādhana of Saroruha by heart, and everyone was astonished.
It was reported in all quarters that “this one is definitely distinctive,” and from then on he was known as Phakpa.
He taught the Birth Stories at the age of eight and the Hevajra at nine, and when he gave a discourse to an assembly of scholars, he severed the scholars’ pride, and his fame spread everywhere.
When he was ten years old, he took preliminary vows from Sapan before the Jowo in Lhasa.
He received many Dharma instructions on the three trainings and other topics from Sherseng, the abbot of Kyormo Lung.
At seventeen, he went to Mongolia as Sapan’s assistant, and he comprehended most of the good qualities of outer definition-vehicle and inner secret-mantra-vehicle learning possessed by the Dharma lord Sakya Panchen.
1️⃣ Sapan was delighted and, giving him the white Dharma conch shell called Sounds-for-a-Furlong and other gifts, enthroned him as lord of the teaching.
1️⃣ After Sapan passed away, Phakpa bestowed the Hevajra initiation on the Mongolian king Kublai, so he was given the rank of Dishi, or Imperial Preceptor.
1️⃣ As offering for the initiation, he was offered thirteen districts in Tibet.
1️⃣ Of the thirteen districts, six were in Tsang: Lho and Jang, Chu and Ja, and Lha and Shang; and six were in Ü: Ya and Phak, Gyal and Tsal, and Dri and Tak.
2️⃣ The district of Yardrok made thirteen.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, everyone in Tibet and Kham became Phakpa’s subjects, and the Sakyapa gained suzerainty in both political and religious spheres.
1️⃣ At the age of twenty-one, Phakpa rode out of Mongolia.
1️⃣ At the China-Mongolia border, he took full ordination, with Nyethangpa Drakpa Sengé as preceptor, Joden Sönam Gyaltsen as assistant master, and Yarlungpa Jangchup Gyaltsen as secret teacher.
He went to glorious Sakya, where he satisfied everyone, whether superior or inferior, by his endowment of Dharma and material things.
Then, with the arrival of a gold-lettered invitation from the emperor, he once again went to Mongolia.
1️⃣ As offering for granting initiation to the king, he was granted three provinces — the Dharma province of Ü-Tsang, the populous province of upper Amdo, and the horse province of lower Amdo, namely Kham — and pearls measured by the bushel.
Then, he returned to Sakya.
At Chumik Ringmo in Tsang he sponsored a Dharma cycle gathering for seventy thousand monks and offered them the gold, tea, silk cloth, and other valuables he had obtained.
1️⃣ He attained final peace at the age of forty-six.
2️⃣ He had many disciples.
1️⃣ Phakpa’s younger brother, the protector of beings Chakna, had mastery of magical powers such as reviving the dead and was reputed to be an emanation of Vajrapāṇi.
When the noble lord, the glorious Atiśa, arrived in Tibet, he saw two wild yaks on the slopes of Sakya Mountain and prophesied that good deeds would be performed by two Mahākālas: the two were Gur and Shel.
He prostrated toward the whitish earth: there were seven dhīḥ syllables and one hūṃ syllable, so he prophesied that eight emanations — seven emanations of Mañjughoṣa and one emanation of Vajrapāṇi — would work for the sake of beings.
1️⃣ Accordingly, Sachen’s son Khöntön Künga Bar, the two Jetsün brothers — Sönam Tsemo and Drakpa Gyaltsen — Chungpal Ö, Sapan, Sangtsa Sönam Gyaltsen, and Phakpa were the Mañjughoṣas; and the lord of secrets, Chakna, was Vajrapāṇi.
2️⃣ Sachen himself was Avalokiteśvara.
1️⃣ Thus, there were three types of emanations and seven Mañjughoṣas who came in succession.
1️⃣ Of these, Sachen, Sönam Tsemo, and Drakpa Gyaltsen were said to be the three lay emanations, while Sapan and Phakpa were said to be the two monastic emanations; those five are known as the five early Sakya manifestations.
Thus, because of the preceptor-patron relationship between Sapan and his nephew Phakpa and the Mongol kings, the Sakyapas controlled all Tibet and Kham.
By order of the king, the lama did the work of Dharma and gave worldly commands in conformity with the Dharma, and civil governors did the work of the law; so for just over a century, Tibet was happily ruled by the dual system.
1️⃣ When the Mongol king issued an order that all Tibetans make the Sakya Dharma system their own, Phakpa thought that if that were done, it would result in partisan attitudes and actions.
1️⃣ He said that it would be good if the Dharma systems that had come down to each were left in place, so an edict was proclaimed to that effect.
Having been handed Tibet when he was just twenty years old, Phakpa ruled until he was forty-six.
After him, Dharmapāla ran the monastic seat and the nation for seven years, Sharpa Jamyang Shithokpa for eighteen years, Lama Daknyi Chenpo for nineteen years, no one for a three-year interval, Khetsün Thenpo for nineteen years, and Lama Dampa for three years.
1️⃣ Then, in the third year of the reign of Taen Lodrö Gyaltsen, Jangchup Gyaltsen of Situ gained control over most of Ü and Tsang, and Sakya power was destroyed.
1️⃣ From then until now, the family lineage has ruled just a fraction of their previous domain.
The family lineage controlled the common area around the seat of authority at Sakya up through Sangtsa’s son Yeshé Jungné, his son Daknyi Chenpo Sangpo Pal, and the chief of his fifteen sons, the Dishi Künga Lodrö.
2️⃣ Künga Lodrö divided the area among the brothers, so the family split into four: the Shithok residence, the Lhakhang residence, the Rinchen Gang residence, and the Düchö residence.
1️⃣ Nowadays, the lineages of the first three no longer exist.
1️⃣ Later, Jamyang Namkha Tashi of the Düchö residence erected Tsedong Chödé and Sisum Namgyal, so the monastic seat came to have upper and lower divisions.
Still later, during a period of conflict between Desi Sangyé Gyatso and Lhapsang Khan, a member of the Tsedong lineage named Shapdrung Jamyang Künga Yongdu Jawa performed magic against Lhapsang, so that when Lhapsang took control of Tibet, Shapdrung escaped and went to Amdo.
1️⃣ From then on, the lower-monastery family lineage was apparently severed.
1️⃣ The family lineage in the upper monastic seat has come down without interruption, and the tantric master Wangdü Nyingpo now sits on the throne.
Among those who succeeded in the family lineage, during the earlier time when all Tibet and Kham were completely controlled by Sakya, celibates were called by the honorary titles of precious highness and great lord, and tantric masters were called Sakya throne holder.
Just as it is explained in the sutras that one gains great merit by declaring the Śākya clan supreme among the clans in the world, so do the holy here in Tibet state that the merit is great from speaking of the line of Khön Mañjughoṣa.
1️⃣ In the great Sakyapa Sachen Nyingpo’s dream, all places — the side of the throne and elsewhere — were covered with countless bodies of Mañjughoṣa beyond imagining, and in particular, in the center of these, there were seven great bodies of Mañjughoṣa, blazing with the thirty-two major and eighty minor marks: this occurred in the dream.
Therefore, from among the family lineage, the seven most wonderful emanations of Mañjughoṣa and all the others, too, are explained as manifestations of Mañjughoṣa’s compassion.
1️⃣ Here, I have respectfully written just briefly about the family line.
1️⃣ Philosophical lineages Although the countless individual upholders of the teaching cannot be enumerated individually, I will mention some of the main ones.
With respect to upholders of the teaching of the glorious Sakya, it is known that the main upholders of the teaching on the sutra side are the duo of Yak and Rong, and the main upholders of the teaching on the secret-mantra side are the duo of Ngor and Dzong.
1️⃣ Upholders of the sutra teaching Yaktruk Sangyé Pal was actually the son of an official from Tsethang, Jangchup Rinchen, but he was called Yaktruk because he was made out to be the son of someone named Yakru, who in aspect was Jangchup Rinchen’s attendant.
1️⃣ Yaktruk’s disciple Rongtön Mawai Sengé was an emanation of Maitreya, and he so admired the instructions on Shijé and Kamalaśīla’s Stages of Meditation that he also was reputed to be a reincarnation of Pha Dampa Sangyé and Kamalaśīla.
1️⃣ He erected the Nālendra teaching center.
1️⃣ He went on the debate circuit for all ten difficult texts.
There were sixty-four textual systems he taught to others and forty textual systems on which he wrote explanations.
He did nothing but expound texts throughout his entire life, so he had many disciples who were scholars, of whom a multitude became disciples of Jé Tsongkhapa: Sempa Shönu Gyalchok, Markhampa Drakpa Sangpo, Gungru Gyaltsen Sangpo, Narthangpa Sherap Sengé, Drachung Yönten Gyatso, and others.
1️⃣ From among the multitude of others, Dakpo Tashi Namgyal ran the main Nālendra monastery, and Jamchen Rapjampa Sangyé Phel founded Kyetsal Monastery in Dreyül.
1️⃣ Five monasteries branched off from that: there was the duo of Thupten Wangyal and Yangpachen, plus Nyenyö Jashong, Chökhor Lhünpo, and Kyetsal Ok, so there were six monasteries for dialectics — the mother Kyetsal and five sons.
1️⃣ The custom of giving scholars the name rapjampa, “the all-encompassing one,” spread during Sangyé Pal’s lifetime.
1️⃣ Among his great many disciples was the duo of Panchen Bumtrak Sumpa Jampa Chödrup and Jamyang Künga Chösang.
1️⃣ The former was known as Bumtrak Sumpa, because he had memorized the Perfection of Wisdom in a Hundred Thousand Verses in a single month.
1️⃣ He founded the monastery of Nyenyö Jashong.
Jamyang Künga Chösang and his disciple Shungyapa Ngödrup Palbar founded Chökhor Lhünpo.
Moreover, there were many scholars in the lineage of disciples: Chakthangpa Jampa Sönam, and then Mangthö Ludrup Gyatso, Khenchen Ngawang Chödrak, and others.
1️⃣ Also, Rongtön’s disciple Shākya Chokden founded Thupten Serdokchen, Sangyé Pal’s disciple Gorampa Sönam Sengé founded Thupten Namgyal, and Dedünpa Tenpa Rapsal founded Rawa Mé.
1️⃣ The stream of explanation of the definition vehicle was propagated by many disciples and grand-disciples.
1️⃣ It is said in Mangthö Ludrupa’s Almanac of the Teaching and other texts that the duo of Yak and Shön are the upholders of the teaching of the sutra side of the Sakya.
1️⃣ Those two are Yaktruk Sangyé Pal and Rendawa Shönu Lodrö.
The latter fully studied the sutras with Nyaön Künga Pal and others.
He received Madhyamaka teachings from the great preceptor Jangchup Sengé, and by analyzing with his own intelligence, he understood the subtle key points of the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka view and taught them.
He himself stated, “At the beginning of my education, when someone said, ‘there is a Madhyamaka book,’ I thought it not very valuable.
Nowadays, I think it something to reckon with, so I have worked on behalf of the teaching.”
1️⃣ Karma Könshön said, “Nowadays, everyone, wise and the foolish alike, is talking Madhyamaka out of their mouths, Madhyamaka out of their noses. This is due to the kindness of Rendawa.
1️⃣ Before that, the Madhyamaka at Thangsak was nothing but a corpse.”
Rendawa received all the special instructions on the Guhyasamāja and other tantras from Lotsāwa Namsang, Lotsāwa Dragyal, Lotsāwa Kyapchok Palsang, and others, and propagated them extensively.
1️⃣ He clarified exactly how the Guhyasamāja accords with the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka view, so of the multitude of upholders of the Sakya teaching, he alone is renowned as the kindest.
1️⃣ He also was a source of excellent explanations.
As was said of him: There was a set of ten textual systems that he explained: The four great difficult ones of the supreme ornaments beautifying Jambudvīpa; The trio of the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, Entering the Middle Way, and the Four Hundred Stanzas; as well as the Sublime Continuum, The Treasury of Higher Knowledge, and the glorious Guhyasamāja.
Also, it is said that his disciples include the seven virtuous friends who spoke of untold textual systems, the ten who spoke well on the four difficult subjects, and over a hundred disciples who knew the perfection of wisdom and valid cognition.
1️⃣ The trio of Jetsün Tsongkhapa and his two spiritual sons, Gyaltsap Jé and Khedrup Jé, are also included among his students.
Before Gyaltsap Jé, those who went on the debate circuit discussing the texts known as the four great difficult ones, the six that were appended to those, and others, were simply called kashipas, or experts in the four difficult subjects, but after Gyaltsap Jé introduced the custom of explaining the ten books, the custom began of calling debaters kachupas, or experts in the ten difficult ones.
Upholders of the secret-mantra teaching The upholders of the Sakya secret-mantra teachings were those known as the duo of Ngor and Dzong, or as the two Küngas.
1️⃣ They were the duo of Ngorpa Künga Sangpo and Dzongpa Künga Namgyal.
Ngor There was a division in the lineage of disciples descending from Lama Dampa Sönam Gyaltsen: his disciple was Palden Tsültrim, the latter’s disciple was Buddhaśrī, and Buddhaśrī’s disciple was Ngorpa Künga Sangpo.
1️⃣ In 1429, Ngorchen founded Evaṃ Chöden Monastery.
1️⃣ He gave innumerable initiations, guidelines, and special instructions; for example, he taught Lamdré eighty-three times and gave the Vajra Garland initiation more than sixty times.
1️⃣ Also, he bestowed the full monastic vows over ten thousand times. He kept the vinaya rules purely, so throughout his entire life, he maintained an exclusively vegetarian diet.
He was known to have been mentioned in the scriptures of the Conqueror, such as the Lotus of the True Dharma and others.
1️⃣ He had many disciples: Jamchen Rapjampa Sangyé Phel, the duo of Gorampa and Shākya Chokden, Bumtrak Sumpa, Künga Chösang, and others.
1️⃣ The main one was Muchen Sempa Chenpo Könchok Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ Ngorchen gave him a hidden Dharma on the key points of Lamdré that he had not taught to other disciples.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, there was a custom of presenting Lamdré as public explanation and private explanation.
Later, Könchok Lhündrup, Tartsewa Namkha Palsang, Drupkhangpa Palden Döndrup, and others came successively as upholders of the lineage; it came to be known as the system of Ngor.
1️⃣ Dzong The Dzongpa tradition is twofold: earlier and later.
1️⃣ What is called the earlier Dzongpa or the Musepa includes Lama Dampa Sönam Gyaltsen’s disciple Dzongchungwa Ngakchang Sungkyi Palwa, and after him Jé Sangpo Gyaltsen, Gyaltsen Könchok, Gewa Sangpo, and others; as well as the disciple lineage of Gyaltsen Könchok’s disciple Musepa Dorjé Gyaltsen.
There also were many others: Lama Dampa’s disciple Thekchen Chöjé Künga Tashi, the latter’s disciple Dzongpa Künga Gyaltsen, Drakthokpa Sönam Sangpo, and others.
2️⃣ Drakthokpa’s heart son Thutön Künga Namgyal was said to be an emanation of the tantric masters Śrīsiṃha, Nanam Dorjé Düjom, and others.
He was called Thutön because he took birth in the family lineage of Thönmi Sambhota.
1️⃣ When he was young, he was called Dranga Gyalpo.
1️⃣ He took full ordination from Jé Jampa Lingpa.
1️⃣ He founded Gongkar Dorjé Den Monastery in Ü, and established ritual practices for multiple mandala rites, the sequence of rituals, dances, and so forth.
2️⃣ His deeds were performed with the help of Dharma protectors; he was very famous for his magical powers and abilities.
1️⃣ He also wrote many texts.
Those in this lineage are called the later Dzongpas or Gongkarwas.
1️⃣ Tsar Later came Tsarchen Losal Gyatso.
1️⃣ Intending at first to be a Gelukpa, he entered Tashi Lhünpo Monastery.
1️⃣ One day a nun said to him, “Jetsün Doringpa sent me to summon you; I was asked to confer this gift.” She handed over a book then disappeared without a trace.
1️⃣ His mind shaken by this, Tsarchen went to Doringpa and told him the reason for the visit.
1️⃣ Doringpa told him the text had been stolen by Vajrayoginī.
1️⃣ When he inserted the book into the empty space in the middle of the pile of manuals from which the ḍākinī booklet had been taken, it fit there perfectly, so Tsarchen gained great conviction.
1️⃣ He received from Dakchen Lodrö Gyaltsen and Doringpa Künsang Chökyi Nyima all the instructions that came from Ngor and Dzong, and the ear-whispered-lineage instructions held only in the family lineage and unknown to those in the Ngor, Dzong, and other lineages.
1️⃣ He became a great ocean collecting into one the countless rivers of the Sakya teaching.
His many disciples included Jamyang Khyentsé Wangchuk, Mangthö Ludrup Gyatso, Ngakchang Sönam Chöpal, Khenchen Lapsumpa, Bökharwa Maitri Döndrup Gyaltsen, and others.
1️⃣ The upholders of the lineage Wangchuk Rabten, Sönam Chokden, Khenchen Ngawang Chödrak, and others propagated the teaching in many places.
In later times, too, there were many able upholders of the Tsar-system ear-whispered lineage: Morchen Künga Lhündrup, Nesarpa Künga Lekpai Jungné, and Dakchen Dorjé Chang Ngawang Künga Lodrö and his spiritual sons, and others.
The Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso, received instructions on Pañjaranātha, Kṣetrapāla, and other deities from Tsarchen; and his highness the Great Fifth Dalai Lama received from Nesarpa Gönpo Sönam Chokden instructions on the thirteen golden Dharmas of the Tsar-system Lamdré, the cycle of instructions on the greater and lesser protectors, and other teachings.
Nowadays, the golden Dharmas and the instruction on Kṣetrapāla have spread quite a bit among the Geluk.
Thus, the lineage transmitted from Tsarchen is known as the Tsar system, the special instruction of the highly secret disciple-explanation tradition, unheard by the average Sakyapa. Current conditions In former times, in the lands of Mongolia and China, and in Amdo and Kham and upper and lower Tibet, there were many monasteries where holy upholders of the Sakya teaching, as well as monks, gathered.
Nowadays, there are several monasteries, such as Lhündrup Teng in Dergé and others.
But apart from rule by the line of Ngor abbots, in other regions there do not seem to be monk practitioners who are upholders of the lineage of the Sakya Dharma.
The glorious Sakya has countless enumerations of the Dharmas of sutra and mantra, and in particular there are extant nearly innumerable initiations, tantric explanations, special instructions, yogic applications, and so forth, in relation to the four classes of secret mantra.
Of these, it seems that what is identified as the thirteen golden Dharmas not allowed outside the iron fence of the monastery is separate from these.
According to the Tsar system, the thirteen are: the three Khecarī cycles, the three cycles of the great red ones, the three cycles of the lesser red ones, Amāravajradevī, Red Jambala, Siṃhamukhā, and Black Mañjughoṣa; when one adds Siṃhanāda Avalokiteśvara to those, they are called “the fourteen golden Dharmas of Lupa.
Moreover, unbroken lineages beyond imagining have survived to the present time: the initiation of the Vajra Garland; the general instructions and side instructions for the Ocean of Sādhanas, and others; the Ārya system and the Jñānapāda system of Guhyasamāja interpretation; the Kālacakra; the four special oral traditions of Hevajra; the three Heruka systems — of Lūipa, Kṛṣṇācārya, and Ghaṇṭapa — along with the practice of the Donkey-faced Heruka; the three Yamāntakas, red, black, and Vajrabhairava; and other new tantra traditions.
1️⃣ Also remaining are the Dharma cycles of the protectors: the ancestral instruction on the cycles of Yangdak Heruka together with the old tantra Vajrakīla; the protector Pañjaranātha; the four-headed Mahākāla; the lords of the cemetery; the attendant deity of Pañjaranātha, Bektsé; the guardians of Vajrakīla; and others.
1️⃣ In particular, the history of the principal Dharmas — Lamdré and others The history of Lamdré: The essence of the Sakya Dharma is the precious oral instruction on the path together with its result.
1️⃣ The actual practice is the succession of practices on the path of the two stages of Hevajra, along with their ancillaries.
The stages of the common path are fulfilled in the context of the three appearances, so Lamdré is the complete, inerrant path of the entirety of sutra and mantra.
Drokmi and his disciples The history of Lamdré: The disciple of the glorious protector, Ārya Nāgārjuna, was Śākyamitra, whose disciple was Jvalapradhāna, whose disciple was the elder, the glorious Dharmapāla.
1️⃣ When the latter devoted himself to tantric conduct, he was given the name Virupa.
His disciple was Ḍombi Heruka, whose disciple was Durjayacandra or Prajna Indraruci.
1️⃣ From the latter, the great lama Drokmi received secret-mantra initiations and extensive tantric explanations and special instructions for four years.
1️⃣ He also received teachings on Lamdre without its root text.
Drokmi went to Tibet and gave many instructions on the tantras, Kuddalapada's Special Instruction on the Inconceivable Stage, and other texts, so many disciples emerged.
Go Lotsawa Khukpa Lhetse and Marpa Lotsawa both were his disciples, but the great lama was so restrictive with the Dharma that a major donation was required for even a minor instruction, so those two, thinking they would meet pandits if they went to India, did not remain long with Drokmi.
1️⃣ When Drokmi was staying in Namkarpo, he received a report that the pandit Gayadhara had come to Tibet.
He went to Gungthang to welcome him and greeted him there. He traveled with the pandit and received many Dharma teachings from him, even on the road.
Drokmi invited Gayadhara to Mugu Lung and, for five years, received from him there the complete precious oral instruction.
Drokmi offered him a donation of five hundred gold srangs.
The pandit went to India; after returning to Tibet twice, he passed away in Kharak; he had lived for three hundred and fifty years.
1️⃣ His other names were Tringyi Shukchen and Lawa Marpo.
1️⃣ Apparently, there was a Lawa Marpo in the guru lineage of Devi, who was the pandit Prajnagupta; and there was another Lawa Marpo who spread uniting and freeing and other degenerate practices; they should not be mistaken for Gayadhara.
1️⃣ The complete oral-instruction lineage was given by Drokmi to the trio of Lhatsün Kali, Dromdopa Tönchung, and Setön Künrik.
He gave a portion each of the oral instruction to the disciples known as the three males — Gyergom Sewo, Shengom Röpo, and Üpa Drongpoché — and to the four females — Tömo Dorjé Tso, Sangmo Köné, Shapmo Jamchik, and Chemo Namkha — and all seven became adepts.
1️⃣ He gave the complete text and explanation lineage to the quintet of Gyijang Ukarwa of Lhetsé, Shapkyi Draktsé Sonakpa, Wangtön Könchok Gyalpo, Khön Könchok Gyalpo of Sakya, and Ngaripa Salwai Nyingpo.
This great lama Drokmi had the virtue of being learned in many texts and special instructions, and attained stability in both the generation and completion stages.
1️⃣ Through his control of the psychic winds, he sat in full-lotus position in the sky.
1️⃣ He wished to become a buddha without giving up his body, through enlisting death onto the path, but his spiritual sons embalmed him, and did other things, which was a small omen that it was not to be.
2️⃣ He did, however, gain the yogic achievement of Mahāmudrā in the bardo.
Drokmi gave the complete oral tradition to three disciples, but the instructions did not spread from two of them.
According to a prophecy made to Setön Künrik, the spread of the instructions would depend on the brother and sister Shama; the sister-brother pair, Machik Shama and Khönphuwa Chökyi Gyalpo, received the oral tradition from Setön.
2️⃣ They practiced and became adepts.
It also seems they worked extensively for the benefit of others. More may be learned about them from other, more extensive chronicles.
In general, the lineage of Lamdré spread gradually from the great lama Drokmi, and it is said that eighteen different oral traditions arose.
1️⃣ The main one was the special oral tradition given to the Sakya jetsüns: Khön Könchok Gyalpo received explanatory instructions from Drokmi that were chiefly explanations of the Vajra Tent and Hevajra.
Setön took explanatory instructions on tantra from the great lama Drokmi’s direct disciple Ngaripa Salwai Nyingpo, and he also received instructions from Khön Könchok Gyalpo.
1️⃣ Setön himself attained high realization and lived to be eighty-eight years old.
1️⃣ When he was eighty-seven, Sachen Künga Nyingpo came to meet him and was very pleased.
1️⃣ Setön told him, “Come; I will give you instructions.”
Because of a small hindrance, however, Sachen did not hear them, and the next year, the great Setön passed away.
1️⃣ Later, Sachen was tormented by not having received instruction.
1️⃣ He asked who had the instructions of Setön and was told that Gönpawa and his younger brother did.
1️⃣ The younger had passed away, and when he went to the older one, the omens were somewhat inauspicious, but Shang Gönpawa happily gave him the complete instructions on Lamdré.
1️⃣ From then on, the glorious Sakyapas became lords of both the textual and instruction lineages.
1️⃣ The nature of Lamdré Even the Sakyapas have varying ways of explaining Lamdré.
1️⃣ Until Ngorpa, the terms “public” and “private” explanation were unknown.
1️⃣ Ngorpa Künsang made a distinction between public explanation and private explanation, and from then on it was known that Lamdré was divided thus.
1️⃣ If I elaborate extensively on the nature and workings of the Lamdré instruction, I’m afraid it would be too much, so I will say this: “In the sky that is the basis of purification, the thick clouds that are to be purified By the purifier — the breeze of the yoga of the two stages — Multiply here en masse, but self-arising, they are self-freeing, And the result of purification — the stainless sky — shows its own face.”
1️⃣ What is present as the basis is pointed out through initiation, Cultivated as the path, and, when experienced by means of the view, Dawns as the culmination of attainment.
The actualized result, This inexhaustible treasury unknown to others, is the special wealth of Virūpa. “
When one spreads the water and compost of the four connections arising from the initiations On the vast, rich ground of the primordial mandala, The result is the four bodies.
1️⃣ This way of farming, Which fulfills the wishes of all, is the skillful means of Virūpa. “
Whatever magical apparitions of external demons appear From the play of the winds and mind in the channel-syllables, This gold-transforming elixir that changes the iron and copper of confusing appearances Into gold is the special profundity of Virūpa. “
The primordially unelaborated empty nature United with the individual channels, syllables, drops, and winds, Is distinguished according to the initiation as ‘apparent yet empty,’ ‘lucid yet empty,’ ‘Blissful yet empty,’ and ‘aware yet empty’; this is the view of Virūpa. “
1️⃣ The path of the entire doctrine is complete in this mode of guidance.”
1️⃣ I sing this song that pleases Sarasvatī And wonder whether Virūpa has passed to me The great all-conquering banner.
On the basis of the many technical terms of its own language, the Lamdré was criticized in earlier times, as in Ngok’s Thorny Plant: The golden Dharmas of Gayādhara arose From confusion about the transmission of mother-goddess tantras.
There were others, as well, and nowadays, it seems some in our own Geluk party say that study of and reflection on Lamdré do not help us to understand the meaning of the tantras, but this merely shows the fault of their never having received the proper guidance of the four sources of valid cognition and the four ear-whispered lineages.
1️⃣ A presentation of the Sakya view A presentation of the glorious Sakya view: Many, like Jamgön Sapan, Rongtön, and others, gave primacy to the Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
1️⃣ Jetsün Rendawa upheld the Prāsaṅgika view.
1️⃣ Shākya Chokden at first preferred the Madhyamaka view, in mid-life the Cittamātra view, and at the end the Jonang view.
Many others, it seems, took the view of Dzokchen as supreme.
1️⃣ The unique Sakya view is the view of Lamdré, which requires nonapprehension of true existence by a clear, empty mind or seeing the inseparability of samsara and nirvana.
Accordingly, the presentation of the Sakya view has two divisions, sutra and mantra.
1️⃣ The sutra system also is twofold: the special instructions of the followers of Nāgārjuna and the special instructions of the followers of Maitreya.
1️⃣ A presentation of the views of the sutra system Special instructions of the followers of Nāgārjuna Āryadeva states: In the beginning, turning away from the nonmeritorious; In the middle, turning away from the self; And in the end, turning away from all views: Whoever knows this is truly wise.
As stated here, in the first of the three stages, by meditating on the disadvantages of samsara, the difficulty of obtaining the leisure and fortune of a perfect human rebirth, karma and its result, love and compassion, and so forth, you turn away from the nonmeritorious.
1️⃣ In the middle, you turn away from self.
And in the end, in order to turn away all views, you do two things: sever the elaboration apprehending true existence and sever the elaboration apprehending non-true existence.
Severing the elaboration apprehending true existence First, you identify the apprehension of true existence that apprehends the five aggregates of your continuum as truly established.
If your own aggregates are truly established, they should be established from the very beginning, without depending on any causes or conditions.
Since the aggregates only exist having arisen from causes and conditions, they are not truly established. Having resolved your thought thus, you fix your mind on that.
At first, constraining the mind, you sever the conceptual thought apprehending true existence.
In the middle, you relax, relaxing into the view with a relaxed mind, maintaining that through self-liberation from all apprehending.
3️⃣ At the end, you alternate constraining and relaxing, or, alternatively, hold to your natural state: without losing mindfulness and introspection of the view, you settle the mind loosely.
1️⃣ When you gain confidence in that, Āryadeva says: The emptiness of one Is the emptiness of all.
In accordance with that and other statements, you freely proceed to an understanding that all dharmas are not truly existent, and all the key points of the Dharma will be understood simultaneously.
1️⃣ This is the meaning of “in the middle, turn away from the self.”
1️⃣ For one with superior faculties who meditates on this first stage of the view, it is possible for the second stage to arise simultaneously.
When tranquil abiding has already occurred, then even if the union of tranquil abiding and superior insight does not occur, you may hold the mind of tranquil abiding here on the apprehension of the key point of the view, and the view that is the union of tranquil abiding and superior insight will arise in your mental continuum.
1️⃣ Severing the elaboration apprehending non-true existence Second, the conceptual thought apprehending true existence, which arises from the conceptual thought apprehending the true existence of the delusions and karma, arises from elaboration or apprehension of a sign, so it must be severed; as Āryadeva states, “in the end, turn away from all views.”
Thus, after establishing that all dharmas are not truly existent, you also need to sever that part of sign apprehension in which you think that non-true existence exists; through the essential point of dependent arising, you are led to certainty in the view that realizes all dharmas are not truly existent.
1️⃣ After gaining that certainty, without persisting in that, you also give up clinging to the idea that non-true existence exists.
The object, emptiness, is not to be apprehended as having any kind of existence, nonexistence, and so forth, because emptiness is not an object of any kind of mind that apprehends dualistically; thus should you resolve your thought.
1️⃣ Objects are untouched by elaboration; without polluting the mind with impurities, give up all apprehension and signs and elaboration and settle evenly in natural nonapprehension.
Thus, in the statement, “if apprehension arises, it is not the right view,” “apprehension” refers to apprehending true existence at the time of the first view stage and apprehending signs at the time of the second.
2️⃣ Meditating according to the special instructions of Maitreya In this system, the basic gnosis being, the natural clear-light mind itself, is the basis of samsara and nirvana.
1️⃣ The mind manifesting dual appearance — which does not recognize that, and mistakes apprehended and apprehender as dual — together with its latent disposition, is the innate ignorance that is the root of samsara.
1️⃣ Thus, you should sever this root and dissolve it into its original sphere.
1️⃣ That is twofold: severing the mistaken appearances of object and of subject.
1️⃣ The first, severing the mistaken appearance of the object, is threefold: seeking the concentration that attains the appearance, that is, heat; seeking the concentration that extends the appearance, that is, peak; and seeking the concentration that realizes that there is no object, that is, acceptance.
Although there abides within your own mind a naturally clear and nonconceptual clear-light mind free of the duality of object and subject, you do not see it.
It is obscured by the apprehension of outer objects as truly separate from your own mind, so it is necessary to clear away this obstacle.
1️⃣ The way to clear it away is this: Consider, “If these outer objects are just mistaken appearances of my mind, then they do not truly exist apart from my mind.”
1️⃣ Having concluded this, you strive until the experience of that emerges.
Striving thus, you think that these apparent outer objects, apart from being mere mental mistakes, do not truly exist externally. There then will arise a somewhat clear appearance of confidence in that fact.
That is called the concentration that attains the appearance, that is, heat.
By meditating again, you greatly extend the clear appearance of the former mind; you will gain an experience of confidence that is clearer than the previous confidence; that is called the concentration that extends the appearance, that is, peak.
Also, having striven thus, you experience in meditation the clarity and bliss of the clear appearance in your own mind of the manifest fact that the mistaken appearance of an object to be apprehended is obscuring the clear-light mind in your own mental continuum, and a confidence arises that is greater than before; that is called the concentration cognizing that there is no object, that is, acceptance.
Although the mistaken mental appearance of an inner subject has not disappeared, the mistaken appearance that appears as an external object has disappeared.
Since clinging to external appearing objects as truly existent will not occur at all, that is also called the concentration that attains the appearance of the meaning.
The second, mainly severing the mistaken appearance of the subject: Through renewed effort in meditation, the mistaken mental appearance of an inner subject will also disappear.
An experience will occur that is like directly seeing the clear-light of mind as increasingly clear appearance.
That is the uninterrupted concentration, that is, the supreme mundane attainment.
1️⃣ At that time, although innate ignorance has not been fully purified, the clear light arises mostly purified of the manifest mistaken appearance of object and subject extending from that innate ignorance, so the arising of the gnosis of the path of seeing, the first bodhisattva stage, is easily achieved.
1️⃣ Through renewed meditation, the latent dispositions to the innate ignorance that is the basis of the projection of the object-subject duality are purified, as are their manifestations.
Clear appearance and gnosis arise, like seeing plainly and vividly the natural clear-light mind that is free of the duality of object and subject.
1️⃣ The manifest mistaken appearances related to the three stages of appearing, extending, and attaining have manifested and disappeared; the antidotes to those are the clear appearances of appearing, extending, and attaining, that is, the three stages of the path of preparation that occur in succession.
After that is the supreme mundane attainment: the great clear light in which the manifest coarse innate ignorance has disappeared.
1️⃣ After meditating thus, you see directly with superior insight one part of your own clear-light mind that purifies one part of the innate ignorance and its seed; that is called the path of seeing, which is the first bodhisattva stage.
1️⃣ Then, at the tenth stage, the clear appearance is greatly extended, purifying each part of the ignorance that obscures your clear-light mind.
The eleventh stage is the time of buddhahood: you see without obstruction the natural clear-light mind possessing the two purities. Thus is it explained.
1️⃣ A presentation of the views of the mantra system.
The view of the mantra system: The view is the realization of the real nature of mind; in order to elicit an experience of that, it is necessary to identify the mind that is the basis of its attributes, so first you must seek the mind.
1️⃣ You identify it as the union of clarity and emptiness, and from within that, you point to the innate mind, the original gnosis.
1️⃣ You meditate on the meaning of that: without letting the mistaken mind roam, see whatever appearances arise as the play of gnosis, and if mistaken appearances should arise, with mindfulness of the view and with determination, melt them like ice into water, making all mistaken appearances arise simply as gnosis.
1️⃣ This is how the view is presented in the highly secret private-explanation system.
1️⃣ Identifying the mind.
1️⃣ Further, there is the way of seeking the mind: You orient the mind inward, as in the Kagyü way of seeking the mind.
1️⃣ You seek by inquiring, “Where is my mind? What kind of shape and color does it have?”
1️⃣ When you investigate, you see that the mind is definitely not to be found conventionally, and you identify it as mere clarity, mere cognition, mere motion, cognitive experience, and lucidity. When self-arising experience arises a little from within that identification, that is the realization of the first of the threefold qualities of mind, called the characteristic of mind: clarity.
When, by seeking in that way, you gain certainty that the mind is the emptiness that is free of the three conditions — arising, cessation, and abiding — that is the realization of the second of the threefold qualities of mind, called the intrinsic nature of mind: empty.
1️⃣ When you experience it thusly as empty, it is not like empty space in which all and everything is annihilated; rather, it is looking plainly into the very face of that mind, which is mere clarity, mere cognition, fit to appear as anything.
1️⃣ Since its intrinsic nature is not apprehended anywhere, you determine that it is emptiness.
Although the mind is thus twofold — clarity and emptiness — these are not separable.
1️⃣ The intrinsic nature of mind is empty, yet the slightest motion of the empty searcher is clarity, and when there is clarity, it is empty.
When from within the empty you determine the union of clarity and emptiness, which arises as self-appearing clarity, that is called reaching union.
1️⃣ From within the meat of that experience, which is not just intellectual, any appearance that arises, arises as the play of inseparable samsara and nirvana.
When such an experience occurs, it is the so-called uncontrived intrinsic nature of mind, the complete realization of the quality of the mind as the union of clarity and emptiness.
2️⃣ At that stage, it is said that one has gained the common identification of mind.
1️⃣ The uncommon identification is the identification of the original, innate gnosis.
That gnosis is not identified as the mere general mind or the mind of mistaken appearances; it should be identified as an unmistaken basic mind, the union of clarity and emptiness.
It is given many different names in the sutras, tantras, and treatises: pure mind, buddha nature, natural clear-light mind, vajra mind, and others; it also is called “the causal mental continuum that is the basis of everything.”
1️⃣ The mental confusion that innately appears in your mental continuum is the accidental samsara that is to be purified.
1️⃣ The intrinsic nature of that, which has accompanied the mind since beginningless time, the previously unidentified innate gnosis, is nirvana.
1️⃣ With regard to their intrinsic nature, those two, innate ignorance and innate gnosis, cannot be distinguished; they are inseparable.
1️⃣ Accordingly, that is the causal identification of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana.
The view when you are meditatively poised on the union of the clarity and emptiness of your mind, which is free of the duality of subject and object with respect to the identification of that innate gnosis, is posited as the view that is the path of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana.
Three points related to practice: That view must be stabilized and enhanced by three key points related to practice.
The three key points are: (1) proving that appearances are mind, (2) proving that mind is illusory, and (3) proving that illusions are intrinsically nonexistent.
Appearances are mind First, proving that appearances are mind: It is established by scripture and example that all these externally appearing objects are only mistaken appearances polluted by the ignorance of your own mind; there is no way they are truly established as external. When, through meditation, you determine with certainty that appearing objects are mind, you do not keep your grip on the view of the union of clarity and emptiness, but settle in untroubled clarity.
When you thus determine that appearances are mind, the realization that external objects do not truly exist is nearly the same as the view of the true-aspectarian Cittamātra.
1️⃣ Stabilized on the natural clarity part, you enhance that realization.
1️⃣ Mind is illusory Second, proving that mind is illusory: It is established by scripture and example that if external apprehended objects are mistaken appearances polluted by the mistaken mind that apprehends them, then because the object does not exist, the subject, the mind, does not exist, either.
1️⃣ Thus, when you meditate, you stabilize the emptiness part and enhance that.
1️⃣ Although you may thus realize the object and subject as non-truly existent, if you do not sever the apprehension of true existence in the clear-empty mind that is empty of duality, your realization will be just the same as the view of the false-aspectarian Cittamātra.
1️⃣ Illusions do not inherently exist The third, the proof that illusions do not inherently exist, is twofold: (a) Proof through dependent arising and (b) Proof through inexpressibility. (
a) Proof through dependent arising You might think: Even though all apprehended objects and apprehending subjects are not truly existent, perhaps there is a dharma other than object and subject that is truly established.
All dharmas, however, are not intrinsically established.
1️⃣ All compounded phenomena are non-truly established from the standpoint of dependent arising. [
1️⃣ 146] Uncompounded phenomena are established relative to compounded phenomena.
1️⃣ In other words, “uncompounded phenomena” are established as the parts of compounded phenomena that are empty of true existence; there is no additional truly established entity apart from that.
1️⃣ Nāgārjuna states: Since compounded phenomena do not exist, How could uncompounded phenomena exist?
1️⃣ Thus, all dharmas are proven to lack intrinsic nature from the standpoint of dependent arising.
1️⃣ By reflecting on the meaning of the above authoritative texts and examples like “a recitation, a butter lamp, a mirror, a seal,” you will sever superimposition by learning and contemplating that all dharmas are empty of true existence.
1️⃣ The experience arising in meditation is said to be about the same view as that of the perfection of wisdom and Madhyamaka.
The experience of the union of such emptiness of true existence with the clarity of the original innate mind is the view of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana; it is the supreme good path of Madhyamaka, which, through reasoning from dependent arising, is free of the extremes of eternalism and nihilism.
1️⃣ Proof through inexpressibility Through practicing as explained before, you reduce appearing objects to mind, reduce mental appearances to illusion, and reduce illusion to dependent arising.
1️⃣ You will experience with certainty the fact that such apparently contradictory dharmas are not contradictory.
1️⃣ Because the nature of these arising dharmas cannot be expressed in such a way as to say, “It is like this,” it is simply designated as “inexpressible.”
Since it is inexpressible by words, in fact there is nothing to think about.
Since there is nothing on which to meditate, nor a meditator, there is no object on which to meditate.
Since there is nothing to be viewed, nor a viewer, there is nothing to be viewed by wisdom.
Since there is nothing to be seen, nor a seer, there is nothing to be seen by viewing.
Since there is no one to be liberated, nor a liberator, there is in fact no liberation.
Well, you may ask: If it is unexpressed, the word will not be understood; if it is not thought, the meaning will not be known; if it is not meditated upon, it will not be experienced; if it is not viewed, the ultimate nature will not be seen; and if there is no freedom, there will be no awakening.
What, then, should be done?
1️⃣ The answer is: In the ultimate sense, no portion of appearance whatsoever — what is to be understood, the understander, and so forth — is dualistic.
1️⃣ Nevertheless, you will understand simply through the expression of inexpressibility in conventional discourse.
1️⃣ The actual meaning of the ultimate nature is inexpressible, but through gaining certainty by way of profound scriptures of definitive meaning and the guidance of a lama, you will understand mind itself — nondual gnosis — as the actual ultimate nature of the original mind.
Thus, simply by thinking what cannot be thought, you will know: by thinking about that inexpressible object of understanding without concepts of thought or thinker, you will gain certainty regarding the unthinkable realm.
Simply by meditating without meditation, you will gain experience: that meditation, free from meditated and meditator, is the supreme way of meditating on reality.
Simply by viewing without the viewed, you will see: that very seeing of the meaning of reality as without seen or seer is the best seeing.
Simply by realizing that there is nothing to be liberated, you will be liberated: in reality, there is no bondage, and that very realization that there is no bondage is liberation.
1️⃣ If you understand thusly, you will become enlightened without enlightenment: primordially, the real nature of mind is not seen anywhere, and that manifest gnosis itself, in which all elaborated signs are stilled, is just what is given the name buddha; thus, it is ultimately buddha because it is unseen. “
Well,” you may ask, “How can the aims of sentient beings be achieved?”
The answer is: Because sentient beings do not ultimately exist as intentional objects, there is no acting for the sake of sentient beings.
Conventionally, however, just as all things required and desired come about through the wish-granting jewel, so the aims of sentient beings are effortlessly achieved without thought by force of previous prayers.
With those meanings in mind, Jé Sakya Pandita stated: All dharmas are primordially unarisen, Arising itself also is unarisen, And nonarising itself also appears to arise.
Thus, arising and nonarising, Conceptuality and nonconceptuality, Appearance and the empty, And samsara and nirvana, too, Are ultimately not distinct.
Distinctions come about from nondistinction; If you can distinguish the distinctions within distinctions, You’ll realize the real nature of all samsara and nirvana, Understand the real nature of all objects of knowledge, And know the real nature of all that is good and bad.
When you realize the point that there is no cause of realization, Mind itself, which cannot be liberated, will be liberated; Objects of knowledge, which are not objects of knowledge, will be known; The explanation, that there is nothing to be explained, will be learned; And you’ll achieve your desired aim without desire.
1️⃣ Working with all objects of knowledge, You’ll become the king of all Dharmas.
1️⃣ When the meaning of those verses has been established, then, as Jetsün Rinpoché Drakpa Gyaltsen says: The second of the three is demonstration through inexpressibility: An infant’s laughter and a mute’s dream, Tickling a sensitive spot and sexual bliss; The gnosis of the third initiation and secret union, Waves of enjoyment and the mandala wheel.
1️⃣ He stated this as the way to identify reality by way of eight examples, in sequence the four common examples and the four uncommon examples.
1️⃣ If, through the first four examples, you realize well that all dharmas are just mental, illusory, and without intrinsic nature, the first object of abandonment for tantra, the poison of ignorance, will be extracted.
However, the poison that is the deliberate, continuous activity of ordinary conceptual thought, the root of the suffering of samsara, will not be extracted, so it is called the poisoned view of the time of the cause; one sets as the view the mere cognition of the object.
Based on the latter uncommon examples of the inexpressible, through the faultless gnosis that arises from initiation and the two stages of highest yoga tantra practice, you will be able to draw out the poison of the deliberate, continuous activity of conceptual thought, so that phase is called the unpoisoned view of the time of the path.
It is able to indicate the gnosis of the meaning, so it is also called the gnosis of the indicative example.
1️⃣ It is the view set on concentration-based experience.
Thus it is explained.
1️⃣ It seems that the view set at the time of the cause is not the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka view but just the view common to Madhyamaka and Cittamātra, and that the way that view is elevated is through the view adopted at the time of the path.
1️⃣ That completes my presentation of the glorious Sakya view of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana.
Concluding verses The lamp of the precious teaching of the Tripiṭaka And the four classes of tantra is lifted high, And every direction is filled with Dharma’s shining.
The tradition of the glorious Sakya is: The eye that seeks the liberating path for the fortunate student, The best medicine to clear up the chronic illness of the delusions, The wish-granting tree fulfilling all our desires and hopes, The nectar that grants the deathless stage.
Specifically, it is the wealth of the fortunate, the inner treasury of teaching, The famous oral instruction that collects Into a single vessel the mass of precious meanings Of vast numbers of tantras and the practice of cause, path, and result.
1️⃣ Seeing with his gnosis eye that his very own Task was to protect this pure way, The chief of the teaching protectors, Pañjaranātha, came flying, I think, from the Holy Land, wearing the mask of Sé.
1️⃣ The account describing such events, Sounding like divine music And beguiling like a rosary of pearls, I disburse as an earring for the honest.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation the history of the Sakya philosophical system.
1️⃣ The Jonang and Minor Traditions I will relate the history of the renowned Jonang philosophical system, The way opened wide by Dölpopa, Who is the white banner known as the Omniscient, Unfurled before the learned in every land.
THE HISTORY of the Jonang philosophical system is threefold: a. How it arose, b. The standpoint of the extrinsic-emptiness view of that system, and c. Proving that that view is wrong.
2️⃣ How the Jonangpa arose Künpang Thukjé Tsöndrü founded a monastery in Jomo Nang.
Dölpopa dwelled there and widely propagated this philosophical system, so thenceforth the upholders of the lineage were known as Jonangpas.
1️⃣ The root source of the Jonang philosophical system is Yumo Mikyö Dorjé.
1️⃣ At first, he was a yogin; later, he was given the preliminary ordination name Depa Gyalpo.
He studied with many lamas, such as Sok Dülzin.
1️⃣ He received some Dharma teachings from the Kashmiri scholar Somanātha, and from Somanātha’s disciple Drotön Namla Tsek he received detailed teachings on the Kālacakra tantra commentary, along with its special instructions, and Candrakīrti’s Bright Lamp, along with its special instructions.
1️⃣ Then he went to Uyuk, and when he meditated, he gained realization and conceived the extrinsic-emptiness view.
1️⃣ He mastered the supernatural powers and performed many magical transformations, into a raven, a magpie, and so forth, so he gained great fame as an adept.
He also wrote some textbooks on Kālacakra and other topics.
1️⃣ He passed away at age eighty-two.
Although he had many disciples, the main one was his son, Dharmeśvara, who by the age of twenty understood all the instructions on texts mastered by the great adept.
1️⃣ He studied with many masters and focused on training in Madhyamaka, valid cognition, Guhyasamāja, and Kālacakra.
1️⃣ He was immensely intelligent, supposedly an emanation of Mañjughoṣa.
2️⃣ Although he wrote Dharma texts, they have been lost.
His great spiritual son was Namkha Öser, whose disciple was Dharmeśvara’s son Semo Chewa Namkha Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ It is said that up to Demo’s disciple Jamsar Sherap Öser, the Kālacakra teaching was restricted, but from Jamsar on, it became open.
2️⃣ Jamsar’s disciple was the omniscient Chöku Öser, and his disciple was Künpang Thukjé Tsöndrü.
The latter wrote textbooks on the six yogas of Kālacakra.
His disciple was Jangsem Gyalwa Yeshé.
Yönten Gyatso was a disciple of both Künpang and Jangsem.
Dölpopa and his successors Yönten Gyatso’s disciple was Dölpopa Sherap Gyaltsen, known as the Omniscient.
He received extensive teachings on the Dharmas of sutra and mantra from more than thirty lamas.
In particular, having studied the perfection of wisdom, valid cognition, and abhidharma in detail with Kyitön Jamyang Drakpa Gyaltsen, he went on the debate circuit in Ü and Tsang and became a very famous scholar.
From Kyitön, he received countless instructions on mantra, as indicated by his receiving seventy initiations and their ancillary teachings.
1️⃣ He took his full ordination from Sönam Drakpa, the great preceptor of Chölung Tsokpa.
1️⃣ To this point he was an upholder of the Sakya Dharma lineage, but he arrived at Jonang at the age of thirty-one and received many initiations and teachings and, in particular, initiation guidelines on Kālacakra from Khetsün Yönten Gyatso.
After that, he belonged to the Jonang Dharma lineage.
1️⃣ When he meditated on the six yogas of Kālacakra, a sign occurred that he had completed the stage of breath control.
Then, living in the monastic seat, he erected the great stupa.
He then gained strong certainty about the extrinsic-emptiness view and wrote texts that focus on that, such as the so-called Mountain Dharma: The Ocean of Definitive Meaning and others, so it is said that when he raised the mountain, an ocean broke forth.
He taught many scholars his explanations of the Kālacakra tantra commentary, focusing on the view of extrinsic emptiness.
He had visions of many deities and showed signs of gaining yogic achievements, such as displaying three bodily forms simultaneously.
He gave many disciples the text explanations and special instructions on sutra and mantra.
He undertook many scholarly activities writing treatises and so forth.
1️⃣ Overall, he assembled more than two thousand disciples and more than a thousand serious practitioners.
There are many stories about him: Chim Losang Drakpa saw him as Avalokiteśvara, his attendant Namkha Jangchup saw him as Mañjughoṣa, and so forth.
Of his innumerable disciples, two, Lotsāwa Lodrö Pal and Sasang Mati Panchen, became his heart sons, and many sages continued his work, such as Choklé Namgyal, or Chokgyalwa.
Chokgyalwa was educated at Sakya and became a great scholar.
At first, Choklé did not accept the extrinsic-emptiness view and went to Jonang to debate. The great Dölpopa gave effective explanations based on scripture and reasoning, so Chokgyalwa overcame his dissatisfaction; he then became Dölpopa’s disciple and received many explanations of sutra and mantra, in particular the complete initiation guidelines on Kālacakra.
1️⃣ He also received many Dharma teachings from the omniscient Butön.
1️⃣ He served as Dharma master of Ngamring and wrote many texts on the perfection of wisdom and valid cognition.
His disciple was the great master known as Nyaön Künga Pal.
1️⃣ The omniscient Jé Tsongkhapa received teachings on the Kālacakra from Chokgyalwa and the perfection of wisdom from Nyaön, and from then on, he propagated the initiations and explanations of Kālacakra continuously and extensively.
1️⃣ Later developments Because many scholar-adepts thoroughly rejected the view of extrinsic emptiness, it became dormant.
1️⃣ Later, however, Jonang Künga Drölchok and, in particular, Drölchok’s reincarnation, Tāranātha, revived and illuminated it; they did many things, such as disseminating explanations and composing texts about it.
1️⃣ Tāranātha founded Takten Phüntsok Ling: he erected statues and printed many missing texts and the Jonang system’s treatises.
1️⃣ He also gathered a great many disciples.
1️⃣ Because he and the Rinpung ruler Karma Tenkyong Wangpo had a preceptor-patron relationship, he was greatly renowned in both the religious and political spheres.
Not long afterward, however, Rinpung power declined, and after Tāranātha passed away, the Great Fifth Dalai Lama converted Phüntsok Ling Monastery into a Geluk monastery, and named it Ganden Phüntsok Ling.
Chölung Jangtsé and other Jonang monasteries were also converted into Geluk monasteries.
1️⃣ Most of the prints of the Jonang scriptures were sealed away in hidden places.
At the present time, it is reported that there is a monastery founded at Dzamthang in eastern Tibet by Jonang Künkhyen’s disciple and secretary, Kashipa Rinchen Pal, as well as some scattered monasteries that derived from it.
Outside those, there is not a single institution in Ü or Tsang where the Jonang philosophical system is upheld, and except for Tāranātha’s Jewel Source of Sādhanas, the Dharma streams of Jonang have already attained the rainbow body.
1️⃣ Origins of the extrinsic-emptiness view The view of extrinsic emptiness arose from Yumo Mikyö Dorjé.
When he meditated on the six yogas of Kālacakra, there arose from within him the aspect of the divine body of empty form.
1️⃣ This led to confusion: based on a literal reading of certain sutras of provisional meaning, as well as tantras, he concluded that extrinsic emptiness is the ultimate truth — permanent, fixed, eternal, pervading all things animate and inanimate, existing as an abiding basis, and synonymous with buddha nature.
When he practiced the stages of the six yogas, he conceived a mass of contradictions with regard to manifesting the resultant dharmakāya itself, and he termed that the view of extrinsic emptiness. He mixed it with the guidelines on Kālacakra and expounded it covertly.
Until it came to Dölpopa Sherap Gyaltsen, that lineage was transmitted one to one in the succession of disciples.
Up to that point, aside from just some oral advice, no textbooks focused on that view.
The only upholders of that Dharma lineage were yogins who simply had good meditative experiences, so they did not produce extensive or elaborate expositions to prove the view by scripture or reasoning, and because of that, they were not well known.
1️⃣ Dölpopa wrote a treatise teaching the extrinsic-emptiness view, known as Mountain Dharma: The Ocean of Definitive Meaning, as well as many miscellaneous works, such as the so-called Fourth Council.
1️⃣ He set forth many proofs through scripture and reasoning and laid the foundation of the philosophical system called extrinsic emptiness, the ultimate view.
1️⃣ His follower Choklé Namgyal wrote both long and short versions of Destroying Confusion, and Nyaön Künga Pal wrote the so-called Clear-Light Ornament of Philosophical Systems and other texts.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, Jonang views and practice became well known.
1️⃣ The extrinsic-emptiness view of the Jonangpa The standpoint of the extrinsic-emptiness view is set forth in the famed Mountain Dharma: The Ocean of Definitive Meaning as follows: It is asserted that the ultimate truth of the way all dharmas exist is as permanent, fixed, and eternal.
In the mind-basis-of-all, it is the gnosis part of the duality of consciousness and gnosis.
It is the triple gem of ultimate reality itself.
1️⃣ It is the divine assembly of the awareness inseparable from the dharmadhātu that abides pervading all animate and inanimate things.
1️⃣ It is buddha nature, the intrinsically existent lineage abiding in all beings, synonymous with the one hundred lineages and other things taught in the tantras.
Its mode of abiding is as the continuum of the inseparable basis-cum-result, and its mode of existence is as the three occasions of the dharmakāya.
Even though it abides permanently in the basis of all, it is asserted never to appear to consciousness, and it is extensively shown that the way in which the basis exists is the way the result becomes manifested as the dharmakāya itself through successively practicing the six yogas.
1️⃣ These are clearly taught in the Buddha Nature Sutra, Great Drum Sutra, Sutra Ornamenting the Light of Gnosis, Sutra of the Lion’s Roar of Queen Śrīmālā, Sutra Teaching neither Increase nor Decrease, Great Nirvana Sutra, Flower Ornament Sutra, Stack of Jewels Sutra, and Holy Golden Light Sutra.
1️⃣ It also has been documented extensively in the root texts and commentaries of the Sublime Continuum and other texts that comment on the ultimate meaning of the word of the Buddha, in Nāgārjuna’s Praise of Madhyamaka, and in other texts.
1️⃣ This ultimate is elucidated by the great charioteers; it is meditated on by yogins who have gained yogic achievements; it is the unmistaken claim of the buddhas of the ten directions and the bodhisattvas.
1️⃣ On the other hand, things that are part of the conventional — intrinsically empty, nihilistically empty, negationally empty, insignificantly empty, empty from the outset — must be rejected in every way by those desiring liberation.
Thus it is written.
1️⃣ The proof that that view is wrong: The great, omniscient Dölpopa was reputed to be inconceivably holy, and he was.
Although it is possible he had a special basis or intention — like when the Blessed One taught some students on certain occasions that the self of persons exists — the literal standpoint of his view appears to be identical in every way to the assertions of the extremists.
How so?
The extremists who are proponents of Brahman as sound say: Brahman, which is free of the specifics of directions such as east, west, and so forth, unarisen, indestructible, the intrinsic nature of sound, is, when completely transformed, the assemblage of entities such as form and so forth.
2️⃣ So it should be known.
1️⃣ As they explain: The Brahman that is without beginning or limits Is the real nature of sound and syllable: Worldly conventions arise in it; It transforms itself into actual entities.
1️⃣ Brahman is the real nature of sound, so it is called “the real nature of sound”; the meaning is that it is the unmistakable nature of sound.
1️⃣ The so-called supreme is the self-nature of oṃ.
Oṃ is said to be the intrinsic nature of all sounds and meanings; it also is the Veda.
1️⃣ Oṃ is the means of realizing the Veda, which abides naturally in the gradations of words and letters; oṃ exists as the formal mode of the Vedas.
1️⃣ The proponents of Brahman as sound say that the self-nature of the supreme Brahman holds the quality of the holy result, which is the high state and the definitive good, so it is not seen by the inner agent.
2️⃣ Likewise, the Jonangpas say: The ultimate god, mantra, tantra, mandala, mudra, and so forth, and also the name buddha nature demonstrate that the fundamental way these intrinsically empty conventional entities exist is as permanent, fixed, eternal, transcendently holy self, uniquely pure, primordially imbued with strength and all other good qualities, primordially pervading all worldly animate and inanimate things.
1️⃣ So they say.
Thus, since extremists who are proponents of Brahman as sound maintain that all entities are transformations of sound and possess its intrinsic nature, and the Jonangpa also appear to assert that a permanent, fixed pervader of all that is animate and inanimate is the way everything exists, there is not the slightest difference between them.
Moreover, the Jonang stance on the way one attains liberation does not appear to be different from that of the Sāṃkhya extremists.
The Sāṃkhyas maintain that objects of knowledge are included in twenty-five categories.
Of those, twenty-four are material, while the twenty-fifth is a self whose intrinsic nature is the intrinsic nature of knowledge, cognition, and sentience; it is permanent, fixed, pervading everything animate and inanimate, noncomposite, and free from the actions of going and coming.
1️⃣ Then, when the person, who is conscious, conceives the desire to enjoy objects, the principal, which is material, emanates the entire transformation complex.
1️⃣ The mind, whose intrinsic nature is material, inclines to that, and the person enjoys the object to which the mind inclines.
1️⃣ Thus, while an isolated conscious person has never before been seen in the state of samsara, due to our inclination to identify the person with objects of enjoyment, we circle in samsara and experience suffering.
Then we cultivate mental absorption, and when we are thoroughly accustomed to that, then our attraction to objects gets less and less.
1️⃣ Viewed with the divine eye, the principal, ashamed, no longer emanates the transformation complex.
Further, the transformations first will dissolve into that from which they actually arose, and in the end, the transformations are stilled within the principal.
The principal, resting in a state of potentiality, will never again be revealed, so all these transformations seen by worldly beings will fade like a rainbow in the sky.
1️⃣ When the self, the conscious person, abides in solitude, and not even the slightest bit of anything else appears, that is the attainment of liberation.
2️⃣ So they assert.
1️⃣ Likewise, the Jonangpas assert that although the way all dharmas exist is as permanent from the beginning, because of clinging to objects, we do not see this.
1️⃣ Then, by yogic meditation, we see that the objects’ real nature is that of a mirage, an imputed snake, and so forth, and when we finally attain buddhahood, a permanent, solitary reality appears, but not even the slightest bit of anything else appears.
1️⃣ When all intrinsically empty conventionalities are reduced to nonexistence, and there appears an isolated ultimate, that is the attainment of buddhahood.
1️⃣ Thus, these Sāṃkhya and Jonang standpoints are completely the same and are not the least bit different in terms of right or wrong; this will be apparent to the understanding of any intelligent person who analyzes the matter.
The Jonangpas also say that this present collection of eight consciousnesses — the mind-basis-of-all and the others — have an intrinsic nature that is stained.
1️⃣ In saying that, they are just like the Mīmāṃsaka extremists, who maintain that the intrinsic nature of mind is stained.
Since the stains have entered the nature of mind, even though you may seek an antidote in order to abandon them, it will be utterly pointless; so even if you assert liberation, you only prove samsara.
The Jonangpas also maintain that these conventionalities are merely mistaken appearances, and they maintain that, when you turn aside the conventional, the ultimate is established permanently.
1️⃣ Similarly, various extremist proponents of Vedānta say that this world is only a mistaken appearance, and when you turn that aside, the permanent, all-pervading knower, in which there is no duality of object and subject, abides in natural liberation.
1️⃣ The distinctive, separate self possessed by a living being will be dissolved, when liberation is attained, into the nature of the great self.
1️⃣ The Vedānta and Jonang assertions are the same, because, mere terminology aside, their meaning is identical — their assertion of liberation as permanent, their way of explaining freedom, and their way of explaining samsara.
1️⃣ Moreover, this view on which the Jonangpas settle appears to commit the mistakes of both eternalism and nihilism.
1️⃣ Maintaining that the ultimate intrinsic nature has the intrinsic nature of permanence, one falls to the extreme of eternalism.
1️⃣ Saying that superficial truths exist earlier, in the context of samsara, but do not exist in buddhahood, one falls to the extreme of nihilism.
1️⃣ Refuting Jonang interpretations of scripture In support of their assertion that extrinsic emptiness is the ultimate truth, permanent, fixed, eternal, pervading all that is animate and inanimate, the Jonangpas draw on a multitude of scriptures — sutras, tantras, and treatises — such as the Buddha Nature Sutra, the Kālacakra tantra, Nāgārjuna’s Praise of the Dharmadhātu, and others.
Taking into account, however, the three fulfillments — of intended meaning, purpose, and conflict with actuality — it is absolutely necessary to interpret those texts as provisional.
1️⃣ Take, for instance, the statement that sentient beings have the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, and other qualities of the Buddha: The meaning is that sentient beings possess the basis for those to arise by cleansing the stains on the naturally pure mind.
1️⃣ Although it is stated that buddha nature is permanent and fixed, the intent of the statement is to draw out the meaning of reality for those with extremist views; it is a statement of provisional meaning.
1️⃣ Were it definitive, it would not differ from the self view of the extremists.
The Descent to Laṅka Sutra The Buddha himself taught this clearly in the Descent to Laṅka Sutra: The bodhisattva Mahāmati asked the Blessed One: “The Blessed One has taught buddha nature. The Blessed One has noted that within the body of a sentient being exists the purity that is from the beginning the purity possessing the thirty-two marks.
The Blessed One has noted that just as precious and expensive things may be completely wrapped in a stained cloth, similarly, buddha nature is completely wrapped in the cloth of aggregates, sense fields, and sense factors; it is overpowered by attachment, anger, and confusion; it is stained by the stains of thoroughgoing conceptualization; it is permanent, fixed, and eternal.
1️⃣ If so, O Blessed One, how is propounding buddha nature different from propounding the self posited by extremists?
O Blessed One, extremists also believe in a conception of self propounded as permanent, saying that it is permanent, fixed, without qualities, pervasive, and indestructible.”
The Blessed One said: “Mahāmati, my teaching buddha nature is not the same as my propounding the self of the extremists.
1️⃣ Mahāmati, the tathāgatas, the arhats, the complete and perfect buddhas, teach buddha nature to be the meaning of such terms as emptiness; the absolute limit; nirvana; the unarisen; the signless; the wishless; and the empty.
1️⃣ When they show the door of buddha nature so that the childish may escape the state in which they are afraid of the absence of self, they show the state of the nonconceptual, the domain of the nonappearing. “
1️⃣ Mahāmati, bodhisattvas who arise in the present and future will not manifestly cling to self.
For example, Mahāmati, through his possession of hands, artistry, a hammer, water, string, and pressure, a potter makes various types of containers from a single lump of clay.
1️⃣ Likewise, Mahāmati, through wisdom and various types of skillful means, the tathāgatas teach the complete reversal of all conceptual signs to be the absence of self in dharmas, by teaching that as buddha nature or teaching it as selflessness, as is appropriate.
Like a potter, they show it by various arrangements of words and letters.
1️⃣ Thusly, Mahāmati, the tathāgatas, in order to attract those who cling to the self propounded by the extremists, showed the essential by teaching buddha nature.
1️⃣ How can those whose thought has fallen into the conceptual view that the absolutely unreal self is real come to possess the thought that settles in the domain of the three doors of liberation, and completely awaken to unsurpassed, complete, and perfect enlightenment?
1️⃣ Mahāmati, it is for the sake of that, that the tathāgatas taught buddha nature.
1️⃣ Mahāmati, in order to reverse the views of the extremists, you should recognize that buddha nature lacks a self.
1️⃣ In this passage, Mahāmati is Mañjughoṣa.
1️⃣ In order to sever the doubts of students of inferior intelligence, he asked the teacher the question: “If your way of teaching buddha nature is provisional, then what are the intentional basis and the purpose?
1️⃣ If it is definitive, then how is it different from the self of the extremists?”
The teacher replied to him: If the teaching were definitive, what you say would be true, but it is provisional, so buddha nature is not the same as the self propounded by the extremists.
1️⃣ The intentional basis is the reality-limit.
1️⃣ The purpose is to attract by various methods those extremists who beginninglessly have clung to a self, and who, if immediately taught the way things exist, would be terrified and could not come to the teaching.
1️⃣ They will have faith in a teaching taught in the same way as are their own assertions and words about a permanent self, and faith in the Tathāgata, and from then on they will gradually understand reality; thus their teaching will have no faults, and only good qualities will arise.
If that sutra were definitive, then major paradoxes would ensue, such as: (1) the noncomposite would be adorned by the major and minor marks and other physical qualities; (2) the utmost dharmadhātu possessing the two purities would be included in the aggregates and sense fields, which are corrupted; and (3) the Buddha would be overcome by the three poisons.
1️⃣ Nāgārjuna’s works Also, the teachings of Nāgārjuna’s Praise of the Dharmadhātu and other such works to the effect that the conventional intentional basis is this clear, cognitive mind, as well as dependent dharmas that are dependently arisen; that the ultimate intentional basis is suchness and its cognates; and that the stains are the basis for purification: those are merely imputed conventions.
1️⃣ Otherwise, those texts would be contradict Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way.
1️⃣ You may say: The Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way and other such works establish just the nonaffirming negation of intrinsic emptiness, but the ultimate, extrinsic emptiness is established by the Praise of the Dharmadhātu and other such works, so there is a great difference between them.
1️⃣ The reply is: In order to refute others’ assertions to the effect that nirvana is either an entity or a nonentity, the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way says: Now, nirvana is not an entity; Otherwise, it would follow that it is characterized by aging and death.
There is no existent entity Not characterized by aging and death.
1️⃣ If nirvana were an entity, Then nirvana would be composite.
1️⃣ A noncomposite entity Does not exist anywhere.
1️⃣ If nirvana were an entity, How could nirvana not be dependent?
A nondependent entity Does not exist anywhere.868 That said, if you ask, “Well, what is it?”
1️⃣ the reply is as the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way states: Unabandoned and unattained, Undestroyed and impermanent, Unceasing and nonarising: That denotes nirvana.869 This contradicts your statement above.
1️⃣ If you say that the intention of these verses is to describe intrinsic emptiness, then it undermines your assertion that nirvana is the sole ultimate, with no distinction between intrinsic emptiness and extrinsic emptiness.
1️⃣ Moreover the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way states: Samsara and nirvana Are not the least bit different; Nirvana and samsara Are not the least bit different.
1️⃣ The limit of nirvana Is the limit of samsara; Even on the subtlest level, They are not the least bit different.870 How would you analyze this?
1️⃣ You must say.
1️⃣ If I were to open all the storehouses of mistaken information about the presentation of the two truths, the standpoints on provisional and definitive in the three turnings of the wheel, and so forth, it would be too much.
1️⃣ Extensive explanations can be found elsewhere, and so I will not elaborate here.
1️⃣ Critics and defenders of the Jonang view It is necessary to explain just this much because some who pride themselves on explaining the Dharma nowadays, and in whose hearts the deeds of Māra dwell, say that not only does the Jonang view accord with the Cittamātra but that it also accords with the meaning of the Kālacakra tantra and its commentary, as well as the key points of the mantra system of Mahāmudrā.
They appear to proclaim without embarrassment this teaching that is like the talk of an ominous crow, so I have exposed just a little the defects of that wrongful view.
However, in the ears of others — those not attached to seeing the good and the flawed, gold and a donkey, as equal — how can such talk even have the effect of a herder’s flute song?
In Tibet, the Land of Snows, there are many different standpoints on view.
1️⃣ Schools other than the Jonang have found it necessary to identify the sources included among their respective collections of texts and instructions derived from authoritative pandits and adepts.
1️⃣ Even if there are some errors in the application of terms, when those who have mastered scripture and reasoning and have spiritual experience analyze with an honest mind, all the views come down to a single crucial point, just as stated in the root text and commentary on Mahāmudrā by the omniscient First Panchen Lama.
1️⃣ The Jonang view, however, burst forth on its own and is without lineage sources from Indian pandits and adepts.
1️⃣ It elucidates the meaning of many definitive sutras and tantras incorrectly, and it is said in all the sutras and tantras that spiritual fruition is beyond imagining for a sentient being who lays out so debased and lowly, so irredeemable, a view.
If that sentient being enters the right path, he will become the protector of countless sentient beings, while if he does not, the vital artery of that being’s liberation will be cut, and the cause for the tathāgata body will be destroyed.
1️⃣ Critics Unable to bear that way of seeing, many previous holy beings, as renowned as the sun and moon, wrote many treatises that annihilated that wrong view.
1️⃣ The omniscient Butön wrote The Ornament that Illuminates and Beautifies the Buddha Nature; his heart son Lotsāwa Rinchen Namgyal wrote The Ornament of the Ornament that Illuminates and Beautifies the Buddha Nature; the Tripiṭaka master Tsöndrü Pal wrote The Lamp Illuminating the Buddha Nature; Yardrokpa Rinchen Tok wrote many critical treatises, such as The Vajra of Matchless Might, The Uppermost Gnosis, The Great Vajra Thunderbolt, and The Vajra Hammer.
1️⃣ Also, the Sakya sage Nedrukpa Gendün Pal, the Dewachen Tripiṭaka master Rinchen Shönu, Kashipa Rinchen Dorjé, and others also earnestly criticized the Jonang view.
1️⃣ Also, the great, incomparable Rendawa and our very own lama, the omniscient Tsongkhapa, expounded many scriptures and arguments that refuted that wrong view.
Further, while staying at Nenying, before touching Jé Tsongkhapa’s feet, the latter’s elder spiritual son, the omniscient Gyaltsap Jé, wrote a treatise called Clearing Mental Darkness: Destroying One’s Hold on the Extreme View of a Permanent Self Named Buddha.
1️⃣ He later sent the scholar-monks a widely circulated letter that said: If refuting the position related to this view is not permitted, people will cling to the thought that it alone is right and other positions are confused.
But since ultimate proof is available through scripture and reasoning, and that proof can stand up in debate, let us take as witnesses all the sutras and tantras and their special instructions, the great charioteers of India and Tibet, and the philosophical systems of non-Buddhists and Buddhists, and let’s debate whose view accords with these.
1️⃣ This letter invites debate at any place and time.
Although there were at that time many adherents of Dölpopa’s system who were outstanding debaters — Chokgyal, Nyaön, and others — no one dared to argue against Gyaltsap Jé’s position.
1️⃣ A defender: Shākya Chokden Later came Shākya Chokden of Silung, who had sworn to uphold the Sakya teaching and who was renowned as a great pandit.
1️⃣ Early in life, in writings such as Ascertainment of Madhyamaka, Verse Writings on Debate, and others, with his mind uncontrollably disturbed by the dön demons of partiality, he offered many specious refutations of the presentation of view established by Jé Tsongkhapa regarding the ultimate intent of father Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons.
1️⃣ He himself claimed to accept literally the six collections of reasoning of Nāgārjuna and the texts of Candrakīrti, and he expounded the view of neither existence nor nonexistence as the intention of the glorious Candrakīrti.
1️⃣ In later life, he wrote Distinguishing the Two Systems, in which he claimed that Asaṅga and his brother Vasubandhu were Great Mādhyamikas, that Candrakīrti and others were Madhyamaka proponents of essencelessness, and that that emptiness posited by Candrakīrti and others is a nihilistic emptiness, a nonaffirming negation, so it is not to be practiced meditatively.
1️⃣ He repeatedly said this and wrote many execrable things.
1️⃣ The end result of a lifetime spent studying textual systems was that, when he was about to pass away, he recognized the baseness of his view, which destroys the cause of the dharmakāya of the Tathāgata.
1️⃣ This recognition was a sign of Shakchok’s great good fortune, and when he was on the verge of dying, he himself freely accepted the result, which was in accord with the karma incurred by deprecating the right view he had known early in life.
1️⃣ In later births, he would experience the meaning of the scriptural passage from Āryadeva’s Four Hundred Stanzas: Someone obstructed by only confusion, Who creates obstacles for himself, Will not gain goodness, Let alone liberation.
2️⃣ Such was his lifestory.
Concluding verses In the course of a single philosophical-system moon-cycle, The waxing phase draws out the white light of eloquence, While the black side gathers the darkness of wrong view; The system of the Jomo Nangpa joins them together.
1️⃣ The white dawn of excellent explanation of Kālacakra Draws forth the thousand suns that delight the learned, While the darkness of irredeemable wrong view Obscures the path to liberation: this is the Jonang system.
Sometimes scholars bring down a hail of refutations; On occasion they offer flower garlands of praise.
1️⃣ When someone like me undertakes a decisive analysis, It is difficult to express only praise or deprecation: this is the Jonang system.
This system, which combines into one Both the barbed wire of the view of a permanent, fixed, and eternal self And the golden thread of tantric initiations and special instructions, Is known as “obtained from Kailash in the course of Yumo’s meditative equipoise.”
1️⃣ I fashioned this account, which relates such a history, Like a mirror that naturally clarifies, And a needle that pulls out The thorn of faults and defects.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation of the history of the Jonang philosophical system.
1️⃣ The history of some minor philosophical systems There were various different Mahāmudrā lineages, such as the lineages of Kor Nirūpa and others.
There also were a variety of other lineages, such as the three cycles of Kharakpa.
There was nothing that the lama called Kodrakpa Sönam Gyaltsen did not know about the Dharma.
He was in particular an expert at dispelling hindrances.
I have not seen an explanation of what sort of views or practices he upheld, so I do not know.
Nonetheless, during his time, there was no Tibetan scholar-adept who did not respect him, so his enlightened deeds must have been vast.
Although he had many fine disciples and grand-disciples, it seems that a tradition of which we could say “this is his philosophical system,” or “this is his Dharma stream,” did not last for long.
There was a great study center at Bodong É from which many scholar-adepts emerged.
In particular, there was the man variously called Bodong Choklé Namgyal, Jikmé Drakpa, or other names; his fame spread everywhere for his comprehension of the sutras, tantras, and all the sciences.
1️⃣ He directly encountered many meditational deities who were superior divinities, particularly Sarasvatī.
1️⃣ Trusting in her, he became a virtuoso in poetry.
1️⃣ At the urging of Vajrasattva, he wrote about a hundred volumes, including the Collected Principles and others.
He debated both Yakdé Panchen and Rongtikpa and defeated them.
1️⃣ At Ngamring, he attacked Sakya Pandita’s Treasure of Knowledge, but Khedrup Jé, still a youth, vanquished him in debate.
1️⃣ Although he never met Jé Rinpoché directly, he offered a devout letter of supplication to him.
1️⃣ It is reported that he offered up a eulogy of Khedrup Jé, the Lute of Buzzing Bees, but that attribution is in error, since that work is by Shangshung Chöwang Drakpa.
On one occasion, wishing to establish a philosophical system of his own, he founded some monasteries, such as Palmo Chöding.
Although teaching and study went on there, and a Bodong philosophical system arose, apparently it did not grow or flourish much or last very long.
The second Buddha, the venerable Butön, was invited to Shalu Monastery in Tsang.
He was sponsored by the Shalu Kushang and others, and for a long time he studied the initiations of the four classes of tantra and the explanations of the tantras along with their special instructions.
He built more than seventy mandalas of Kālacakra and of the yoga tantras, mainly the Vajradhātu.
The conqueror Tsongkhapa received the cycles of Kālacakra, Heruka, and the yoga tantras from Butön’s disciples Gongsumpa Chökyi Palwa, Khyungpo Lhepa, and Dratsepa.
1️⃣ After Butön, Dratsepa sat on the throne of Shalu, and Sharchen, Candrapa, and other upholders of the lineage followed.
1️⃣ That is known as the Shalu philosophical system or the Bu system.
1️⃣ Namkha Gyaltsen, the great adept of Lhodrak, was inseparable from Vajrapāṇi.
Although his paternal ancestors in the Shubu line were Nyingmapas, he combined Kadam teachings he had received with the unique Dharmas on the profound key points that were bestowed on him directly by Vajrapāṇi, and he expounded and propagated them.
Although they were not termed the “Lhodrak philosophical system,” they seem to be a distinct Dharma system.
1️⃣ For fear of fatigue from writing about these, I have not elaborated much.
Introductory verses I will briefly relate the authoritative account Of the authoritative teacher, the conqueror Tsongkhapa, And his authoritative teaching, the tradition of the Geden philosophical system, Which was spread by the authoritative upholders of his teaching.
1️⃣ THE GALUKPA or Gandenpa is named after its monastic seat.
Jé Rinpoché Tsongkhapa founded Ganden Nampar Gyalwa Ling Monastery on Drok Mountain, and calling Jé’s tradition “the system of the Ganden Dharma lord” is based on his permanent residence there later in life.
1️⃣ When people tried to pronounce the abbreviation of that phrase, Galuk, it was not easy to say, so it has consistently been called the Geluk.
1️⃣ The name of Jé’s tradition, Ganden Luk, was prophesied in the Book of Kadam, in the prophecy of the future in chapter 26 of the Father Teachings: In the end, the embers of the teaching Will be rekindled by one named Drakpa, Who will accomplish the benefit and happiness of many, And his place is a supreme and holy place.
1️⃣ The “Drakpa” in the second line shows part of Jé’s name, Losang Drakpa, and the “supreme and holy place” shows that the name of the Dharma system, Ganden, is the same as the place name.
1️⃣ So state some of the holy ones of our own Geluk tradition.
1️⃣ Some, though, say that because the philosophical system of Jé Rinpoché was held apart from others, it was called Gerluk, and later the sound ger became corrupted, so it came to be known as Geluk.
1️⃣ This claim is sheer fantasy. Also, just before Lumé Tsültrim Sherap went to Ü, the great lama Gongpa Rapsal gave him an extra, broken-in yellow hat and said, “Put this on, and later you will remember me.”
1️⃣ Because of that, the early great vinaya masters wore yellow hats, and it also was because of that that Jé Lama, as a good omen for the restoration of the vinaya teachings, which were in decline, made yellow the color of the Geluk hat, so as to accord with the early vinaya masters.
Therefore, Jé’s tradition also is known as “the system that holds the yellow hat.”
In the Yellow Beryl, it says, “Although Jé himself did not wish it, he made yellow the color of the hat in accordance with his inner circle’s request that he differentiate his from other philosophical systems.”
1️⃣ This report is babble by those who project their own dispositions into the lifestory of the great holy ārya.
Thus, if I explain just briefly the history of what is called the Geluk or the system of the holders of the yellow-crown hat, there are four main topics, explaining: How the conqueror Tsongkhapa, lord of the teaching, came into the world, How his stainless tradition was extended by subsequent upholders of the teaching, How that supreme system is distinctive, and as an ancillary, How others who try to overturn this system cannot damage it.
1️⃣ How the great Jé Tsongkhapa came into the world Since there are so very many biographies of Jé Lama written by various holy beings, those who want to know his life in detail should look at those.
1️⃣ Here, I will relate only some principal points of his biography.
1️⃣ My account is twofold: 1) How he himself attained good qualities and 2) How, because of that, he served the teaching.
1) How he himself attained good qualities This is twofold: How he took the moral vows, the foundation of all good qualities, and How he actually gained mastery of the good qualities of scripture and realization.
1️⃣ How he took the moral vows, the foundation of all good qualities Our holy guide, the glorious Jetsün Lama Losang Drakpa, whose very name is nearly inexpressible, was in a previous life a greatly heroic bodhisattva, and he made a promise to the Buddha Indraketu to spread in impure lands the good path that delights the conquerors, without regard for his body or life.
Again, at the time when our teacher, Śākyamuni Buddha, had come into the world, he was a young brahman boy, and he offered the teacher a white crystal rosary.
1️⃣ These two events indicate his arousal of the awakening mind and his offering of prayers. Starting in the distant past, he had repeatedly issued great waves of prayer in sight of many conquerors so that he might uphold the conquerors’ holy Dharma.
1️⃣ When the force of those prayers fully ripened, he intentionally took birth in the east, in the Tsongkha region, as the son of Lubum Gé, his father, and Shingza Achö, his mother.
1️⃣ When he reached the age of three, the Fourth Karmapa, Rölpai Dorjé, conducted the ritual for him to become a full lay follower and offered him the name Künga Nyingpo.
At age eight, he accepted from the Dharma lord Rinchen Döndrup the morality of an intermediate renunciant and the vows of a novice monk; the name he was given was Losang Drakpa.
From that holy lama, he received many instructions on sutra and mantra. When he reached the age of sixteen, he went to central Tibet.
Although it is not clear in his biographies how old he was at the time, at some point thereafter he took full-ordination vows in Yarlung Namgyal, with the abbot of Tsokchenpo Monastery, Tsültrim Rinchenpa, who was from the preceptor lineage of the great scholar Śākyaśrī, serving as preceptor, the Jezing abbot Sherap Gönpo serving as assistant master, the vow-observer Sönam Dorjé serving as secret teacher; and a monk in whom he had confidence filling out the number for a quorum.
1️⃣ His mental continuum was utterly suffused with a completely thorough training in superior morality.
How he actually gained mastery of the good qualities of scripture and realization This is twofold: How he gained mastery of the good qualities of scripture through much study, and How he gained mastery of the good qualities of realization through proper practice.
1️⃣ How he gained mastery of the good qualities of scripture through much study This is twofold: How he severed superimposition through study and How, through reflection, all textual systems arose to him as instruction.
1️⃣ How he severed superimposition through study Jé Lama’s purpose in appearing in this world was solely to activate the teaching.
His excellent tradition has not just a portion, but the complete teaching of the Muni, conveying knowledge of how an individual person brings to bear the necessary conditions for awakening, described in all the sutras and treatises, from the Stanzas on Vinaya up to the Guhyasamāja.
His purpose was to clarify like the sun for fortunate students what no previous scholar-adept in the Land of Snows had been able to make clear; as is stated in Dharmakīrti’s Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition: Since the source of the method is hidden, It is difficult to explain.
Thus, one first must ascertain the key points of the complete teaching.
For that, Jé saw that it was first necessary to undertake extensive, not partial, study of countless texts of sutra and mantra, so he studied with captains who were expert spiritual friends and raised the white sail of noble intention, the awakening mind, on the great ship of study.
Blown by the fierce, strong wind of diligence, he entered the great ocean of scriptures and their commentaries; his diligence in seeking the wish-granting jewel of the meaning of the texts was equal to that of the bodhisattva Sadāprarudita.
2️⃣ He did this in two ways: Definition-vehicle study and Mantra-vehicle study.
Definition-vehicle study His study of texts principally composed in the definition vehicle is twofold: How he studied the scriptures in general and How he studied Madhyamaka and valid cognition in particular.
1️⃣ How he studied the scriptures in general As Jé Lama himself said: Therefore, unsatisfied with coarse or polarized understanding Of the texts of the invincible Dharma lord Maitreya And those renowned as six ornaments and two supremes Of Jambudvīpa, I studied all of them in detail.
Jé went to the great monastery of Dewachen: For eighteen days, he listened to Nyethang Tashi Sengé, Densa Yeshé Sengé, Master Yönten Gyatso, and the precious lama Urgyenpa discourse on the root text of Maitreya’s Ornament of Higher Realization along with its commentary, and he understood them fully.
1️⃣ He received teachings on the other four books of Maitreya from Lama Jamrinpa.
In particular, when he heard just once a careful explanation of the perfection of wisdom from Nyaön Künga Palwa, he was very satisfied.
1️⃣ Moreover, he was not content with vague arguments, as today’s students are.
1️⃣ The commentaries on the wisdom side that were asserted by earlier generations of Tibetans to open the chariot-path of the Mahayana: Tsongkhapa studied the Explication of the Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Verses, the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom, Nāgārjuna’s collection of Madhyamaka reasoning, and Maitreya’s Ornament of Higher Realization.
1️⃣ Also, within these four general areas, with regard to the Ornament of Higher Realization, he studied Asanga's Ascertainment of Reality; Vasubandhu's Textual Commentary in Twenty Thousand Verses; Arya Vimuktisena's twenty-thousand-verse commentary in eight chapters, the Elucidation of the Twenty-Five Thousand Verses; Bhadanta Vimuktisena's many-chaptered commentary, the Thorough Exposition in Twenty Thousand Verses; Haribhadra's Commentary Clarifying the Meaning, Great Commentary on the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Verses, Condensed Meaning of the Eighth Chapter, and New Commentary on the Verse Summary; Buddhaśrijñāna's condensed commentary, the Detailed Explication of the Verse Summary; Master Śāntipa's Pure Twenty Thousand, his commentary on the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Verses, and his Supreme Essence; Vimalamitra's Extensive Commentary on the Heart Sutra; the commentaries on the Diamond-Cutter Sutra written by masters Vasubandhu and Kamalashila, and the explications of the Ornament of Higher Realization of Dharmamitra and other followers of Master Haribhadra; the Explanation of the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras written by Vasubandhu, and the explanatory commentaries written by Lord Asvabhava; the Kashmiri scholar Jñānashribhadra's Condensed Meaning of the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras; the great commentary and subcommentary on the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras by Sthiramati; Asanga's commentary on the Sublime Continuum; and Vasubandhu's Explications of the Two Distinguishings, along with Sthiramati's Subcommentary on Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes.
1️⃣ Jé comprehended the meaning of every word of those texts, and within two years he had perfectly mastered the Dharmas of Maitreya.
1️⃣ How Jé studied the texts of vinaya and abhidharma: He received from Jetsün Rendawa Shönu Lodrö precise guidance on Vasubandhu's Autocommentary on the Treasury of Higher Knowledge.
1️⃣ Rendawa’s oral explanation did not depend only on the words written in the text but skillfully arranged the innermost meaning of the whole body of the treatise, so he was able to impart an easy understanding of the entire system.
1️⃣ Thus, Jé gained great faith.
1️⃣ With everything Rendawa taught, Jé comprehended the meanings of every word after listening just once.
He asked good questions about difficult points, so Jetsün Rendawa also was quite impressed, and said to Jé, “To give precise guidelines to you, I really have to be careful!”
1️⃣ Jé also received teachings on Entering the Middle Way of Candrakīrti from him once.
1️⃣ Later, Rendawa gave him a careful explanation of Asaṅga’s Compendium of Abhidharma and detailed teachings on Dharmakīrti’s Autocommentary on the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition, and he gained a good general understanding of them.
1️⃣ He also received teachings on the perfection of wisdom and vinaya from Rendawa.
1️⃣ Because it was from Rendawa that he first reached the door of reasoning about Madhyamaka and valid cognition, Jé regarded this unrivaled, matchless teacher as his principal lama.
1️⃣ Jé received teachings on the complete root text of the Vinaya Sutra, along with its commentaries and ancillaries, from the abbot of Kyormo Lung, the great expert in vinaya and abhidharma known as Kashipa Losal, and on the side, starting from the beginning, he memorized about seventeen arrow-length folios of the extensive commentary on the root text.
1️⃣ The cycle of vinaya and abhidharma texts that he studied and contemplated includes: Guṇaprabha’s Small Commentary on the Vinaya Sutra, Dharmamitra’s Extensive Commentary on the Vinaya Sutra, Master Prajñākara’s Exposition of the Vinaya Sutra, Master Kalyaṇamitra’s Extensive Commentary on the Fundamental Transmission, Master Vinītadeva’s Commentary on the Division of Vinaya, Master Śīlapālita’s Minor Commentary, Master Viśeṣamitra’s Commentary on the Prātimokṣa Sutra, Vimalamitra’s Extensive Commentary on the Prātimokṣa Sutra, the arhat Śakadeva’s Flower Garland of Vinaya, Master Śākyaprabhā’s Exposition of the Novice Vows in Three Hundred Stanzas, Master Vinītadeva’s Fifty Stanzas on the Novice Vows, and so forth.
1️⃣ Jé completely comprehended these vinaya commentaries and subcommentaries, along with their minor limbs, as well as the praxis derived from harmonizing them and the distinction between the permitted and the proscribed.
1️⃣ He also established fully the meanings of the earlier and later abhidharmas, based on Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Higher Knowledge and his Autocommentary on it, Yaśomitra’s Clarifying the Meaning of the Treasury of Higher Knowledge, Pūrṇavardhana’s Tracking the Signs of the Explication of the Treasury of Higher Knowledge, and the Commentary on the Compendium of Abhidharma by Jinaputra.
1️⃣ How he studied Madhyamaka and valid cognition in particular.
1️⃣ How Jé studied the texts on valid cognition: As he himself said: With repeated striving, I studied in particular The difficult points of the texts on perfect reasoning, Which are the sole door to establishing the nature Of entities seen by this-worldly beings.
On the basis of listening first to Lama Jetsünpa Rendawa and later to Lotsāwa Dönsang, Jé examined well and reflected upon Dharmakīrti’s seven treatises on valid cognition, along with Dignāga’s “sutra,” the Compendium of Valid Cognition.
After harmonizing them, he established their meanings well, and seeing that most Tibetan traditions of explanation did not accord with the Indian commentaries, he studied: Dignāga’s Autocommentary on the Compendium of Valid Cognition along with its subcommentary; the Commentary on the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition by Devendrabuddhi and that by Śākyabuddhi; the commentaries on it by the two brahmans; Prajñākaragupta’s commentary on it, the Ornament for the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition, and its two subcommentaries; Dharmakīrti’s Autocommentary on the Ascertainment of Valid Cognition, and the Explication of it written by Dharmottara; and the Commentary on the Drop of Reasoning written by Dharmottara.
Establishing well the meanings of the commentaries and subcommentaries on the father Dignāga and his spiritual son Dharmakīrti, along with associated minor texts, he trained his mind so that he thoroughly comprehended the thought of those two mighty lords of logic, and most Tibetan traditions of epistemological explanation were rendered superfluous.
How Jé studied Madhyamaka texts: As he himself said: Though I worked exhaustively on the texts of sutra and mantra, When I practiced and spoke about their profound meaning, I saw that I had not progressed far from the viewpoint Of one who had learned nothing and understood nothing.
Thus, above all, I studied well all the key points that induce the perfect view through the subtle path of reasoning, which opens the depths of the textual system of Nāgārjuna, and all my doubts were severed.
At that time, the explanatory tradition of Madhyamaka had severely declined in Tibet, so Jé received Lama Rendawa’s explanation of Candrakīrti’s Entering the Middle Way, but he did not hear any explanations of Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way or other texts in the six collections of reasoning.
He did hear an oral transmission of Nāgārjuna’s six collections of reasoning from the Narthang abbot Künga Gyaltsenpa and from Lama Jamrinpa of Dewachen.
In brief, at that time it was difficult for master and disciple both to find a place where one could obtain oral transmissions, not to mention explanations, of the collections of reasoning.
The Madhyamaka texts he studied are: the textual system of Master Nāgārjuna, which includes Nāgārjuna’s six collections of reasoning, along with their commentaries, and Nāgārjuna’s Compendium of Sutras; the texts of Nāgārjuna’s followers, for instance Āryadeva’s meaning commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, the Four Hundred Stanzas; Candrakīrti’s commentary on that, the Bodhisattva’s Practice of Yoga: An Extensive Commentary on the Four Hundred Stanzas; Master Buddhapālita’s Commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way; Master Bhāvaviveka’s meaning commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, the Heart of Madhyamaka; his own commentary on that, that is, the Blaze of Logic; and his word-by-word commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, the Lamp of Wisdom; the Explication of that by Avalokitavrata; Candrakīrti’s meaning commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, Entering the Middle Way; Jayānanda’s Explication of that; Candrakīrti’s word-by-word commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, the Clear Words; Śāntarakṣita’s Ornament of Madhyamaka, which explains clearly the words and meaning of the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, as well as his Autocommentary on that and Kamalaśīla’s Detailed Explication of it; Jñānagarbha’s Distinguishing the Two Truths, his Autocommentary on it, and Śāntarakṣita’s Detailed Explication of it.
1️⃣ Moreover, he studied Kamalaśīla’s Light of Madhyamaka and other works.
Mantra-vehicle study How Jé studied the secret mantra vehicle: As he says in his Song of Realization: To travel to full enlightenment in this life, There are two ways: the profound vajra vehicle And the perfection vehicle; and mantra, it is said, Is very much superior to perfection.
This is known everywhere, like the sun and moon.
Pretending to accept those words as literal truth, Pretending to be a scholar, without asking What that profound vehicle actually is: If a wise person is thus, Then how could anyone else be a dullard?
O, how amazing: carelessly to cast away a path So difficult to meet and unsurpassed!
1️⃣ Therefore, I entered that profound treasure of double achievement, The supreme vehicle of the conquerors, Rarer than a buddha: the Vajrayana.
1️⃣ And long I studied it with repeated effort.
In Tibet at that time, sutra and mantra were widely held to be contradictory, like hot and cold, so those devoted to the perfection vehicle did not engage in secret mantra, while those devoted to mantra rejected the perfection vehicle.
Jé had promised in front of the previous conqueror Indraketu, “I will extend that excellent path that unites the view of emptiness with secret mantra.” Accordingly, in order to place the fortunate in that excellent way in which there is knowledge of how to enlist sutra and mantra in mutual support, he thought that first he should study the secret mantra vehicle, not just in part, but very extensively.
He said, “I did not need others to urge me toward the mantra side; from the time I was small, I had a fierce desire to understand it, and from the first, I had thought that I should study completely all the texts of the tantric classes.”
1️⃣ On one occasion, Jetsün Lama Rendawa said to him, “It will take you a long time to do really extensive research into mantra, so for the time being, wouldn’t it be better to expound the Tripiṭaka?”
Tsongkhapa replied, asking: “Since I have such a fierce desire to understand the mantra side, may I at any rate also research mantra?”
Meeting Khyungpo Lhepa So, Jé himself, having reached the age of thirty-four, in the year of the horse, set his mind on hearing all there was in terms of the initiations, oral transmissions, special instructions, explanatory traditions, and reliable sources of all the higher and lower tantra classes of the Vajrayana. One time, in a dream, Jé found himself seated before a man sitting on a great throne who had an elderly countenance, wore a crown, and was holding a vajra and bell. He said, “I am Lama Khyungpo Lhepa.”
1️⃣ The lama stood up in a dancing pose and made tantric movements; brandishing the vajra and ringing the bell, he made three clockwise circumambulations of Jé.
The syllables e kā pa tsi kā pa resounded from his rosary, and he held the vajra and bell on top of Jé’s head and said, “You will be called Karmavajra,” then went to sit on the throne.
1️⃣ That was the dream.
1️⃣ When Jé rose from sleep, he experienced great bliss, for it occurred to him that the name given in the dream was similar to his previous secret name, Dönyö Dorjé.
1️⃣ He then decided to go to hear about yoga and other topics from Khyungpo Lhepa Rinpoché at his mountain cave at Shalu, and one evening in a dream, Jé found himself seated before a kindly old lama named Precious Khyungpo, who sat on a great throne in the pose of Maitreya.
1️⃣ The lama parted the clothing over his heart with both hands, plainly revealing at his heart multiple long mantra-rosary wheels that circled about. Jé could for the most part read those mantras, whose syllables were vivid and distinct.
1️⃣ Having seen those extraordinary sights, Jé went to Shalu and met that very lama, who looked exactly as he had in his dreams, and as a result Jé gained unspeakably great faith and respect.
So, as Atiśa’s Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment says, If you desire to practice the secret mantra Taught in the action, performance, and other tantras, Then in order to receive the master initiation, You should please the holy lama By every means: respectfully serving, Giving precious things, and practicing as instructed.
1️⃣ When the lama, pleased, Fully bestows the master initiation, Then all your vices will be purified, And you’ll be fortunate in gaining yogic achievements.
Jé pleased his lama in thought by seeing him as the actual Vajradhara and in deed by respectfully serving him with body and speech, and offering the daily necessities and jewels, clothes and silks, and so forth.
1️⃣ And from time to time he pleased him with the very best pledge substances offered at ritual feasts.
1️⃣ Initially, he was drawn to the initiations of the great yoga mandalas: from the action tantras, Sitātapatrā, Trisamayavyūharāja, the Eleven-Faced Avalokiteśvara, Vajravidāraṇa, Amitāyus, and others; and from the performance tantras, the Tantra of the Manifest Awakening of Vairocana and others.
1️⃣ At that time, he received most of the pure streams of initiation extant in Tibet.
1️⃣ Also, within the highest yoga tantra, he received countless traditions: Guhyasamāja-Akṣobhya, the Cakrasaṃvara traditions of Lūipa and Kṛṣṇācārya, and others; the scriptural transmissions possessed by Lama Khyungpo for the most part suffused Jé’s mind the way a vase is filled. He stayed for a year.
1️⃣ At the end of bestowing such Dharmas, when each initiation was complete, Lama Khyungpo would say sincerely each time, “This was bestowed on me by lama so-and-so, and it is happily given by me.”
And he also would say, “Since the scriptural transmission has been properly completed, I now have no regrets, because the Dharma has been transferred to its rightful owner.”
Jetsün Khyungpo Rinpoché distinctly thought: “I have poured into the hands of Jé himself the complete teaching of the Vajrayana, the undeteriorated essence of blessings taken from the oceanic mantra teaching of the omniscient Phakpa Ö and the all-knowing Butön, and the root of the welfare of all the region’s beings is now in hand.”
1️⃣ Studies of the lower tantras. When Jé Rinpoché stayed in Nyangtö Dechen just through one summer and fall, he studied well with the precious Chökyi Palwa and thoroughly mastered the “garland trilogy,” consisting of the Vajra Garland of Mandala Rites, the Garland of Perfected Yogas, and the Light Blossom of the pandit Abhayākaragupta, who enjoyed direct visions of Vajrayoginī.
Jé did this through receiving the initiations, oral transmissions, precise guidelines, and explanations, together with instructions on dance, line drawing, and chanting, for the forty-two great initiations of the Vajra Garland of Excellent Explanation, along with the three mandalas that bring good luck.
He also received many oral teachings on such Dharmas as the Great Wheel Vajrapāṇi and others.
In addition, Jé did not just obtain initiations into yoga tantra, but he invited Yogapa Gönsang to stay at Tritsa Khang, between upper and lower Nyang, and studied in detail the ritual practice of Butön Rinpoché with respect to the dance, line drawing, and chanting, the general arrangement of mandala rites, and the application of mudras for the great mandalas of Vajradhātu, Śrī Paramādya, Vajra Peak, and others.
1️⃣ Again, he invited the Shalu yoga expert and Tripiṭaka master, Gyaltsen Drakpa, to Penam Phakpa Mountain and refined his ability in yogic chanting, ritual practice, and so forth.
1️⃣ He also received the oral transmissions of the many types of tantras and their extensive commentaries: the omniscient Butön’s Great Exposition of the Vajra Source; the Compendium of Reality, Vajra Peak, Glorious Supreme Primordium, the Tantra that Purifies All Lower Rebirths, and other tantras; and Ānandagarbha’s Light on Reality, Śākyamitra’s Ornament of Kośala, Ānandagarbha’s Explication of the Glorious Supreme Primordium, and others.
These are the texts of the three lower tantra classes that Jé studied: Among action tantras, he studied the Secret Tantra on General Mandala Rites; the Tantra of Excellent Yogic Attainments and Varabodhi’s Condensed Meaning commentary on that; the Tantra Based on the Questions of Subahu and Buddhaguhya’s Condensed Meaning commentary on that; and the Higher Contemplation and Buddhaguhya’s commentary on that.
1️⃣ Moreover, he studied the Mañjuśrī Root Tantra; the great Vajrapāṇi tantra, the Supreme Awareness; the Fierce Vajra Tantra; the Vajra Subjugator Root Tantra and its explanatory tantra, the Great Meru; and others.
1️⃣ Through those, he established himself on the stages of the path of the action tantras, and he comprehended them.
1️⃣ Although there were many texts of the performance-tantra cycle that had not been translated in Tibet, Jé did study the main text of that class, the Tantra of the Manifest Awakening of Vairocana.
1️⃣ Of the principal root tantras of the yoga tantra, he studied the Compendium of Reality Tantra together with its supplements; Master Ānandagarbha’s extensive commentary on that, the Light on Reality; Śākyamitra’s extensive commentary on the Compendium of Reality, called the Ornament of Kośala; Buddhaguhya’s Entrance to the Meaning of the Tantra; the explanatory tantra, the Vajra Peak; the Glorious Supreme Primordium; and Master Ānandagarbha’s extensive commentary on that in twenty-four thousand verses, the Explication of the Glorious Supreme Primordium; the Tantra of Victory over the Three Worlds and the scholar Muditakoṣa’s Commentary on it; the Tantra that Purifies All Lower Rebirths and Vajravarman’s commentary on it, the Light Ornament; and others.
1️⃣ In brief, Jé thoroughly studied countless tantras from the three lower classes of tantra along with their commentaries.
1️⃣ Studies of highest yoga tantra.
3️⃣ Masters with whom he studied.
How Jé studied the highest yoga tantras: As it says in the Short Biography: In Shalu, he received most of the initiations and special tantric instructions on all four classes of tantra from Lama Khyungpo Lhepa Shönu Sönam.
1️⃣ In particular, he received teachings on and comprehended the yoga systems of the Sakyapas and Butön and, with respect to Guhyasamāja cycles of highest yoga tantra: Marpa’s system, Gö Lotsāwa Khukpa Lhetsé’s system, the noble lord Atiśa’s system, the Ārya system, the Jñānapāda system, Sachen Künga Nyingpo’s system, and others, along with their Indian and Tibetan explanatory traditions.
1️⃣ He received the explanatory tradition of the basic Guhyasamāja tantra from Jetsün Rendawa, and it is evident that he also received the Ārya system of Guhyasamāja from Gongsum Dechenpa Chökyi Palwa.
Jé says in the Precious Sprout that Severs Extremes: Relying on what I was taught by Jetsün Dampa Kumāramati, or Rendawa; by the venerable Butön’s student, the holy noble lord Khyungpo Lhepa; and by Jetsün Dampa Chökyi Palwa — relying on all three, I received in their entirety the Dharma cycles of the Ārya system.
1️⃣ The initiations and other aspects of the Jñānapāda system he received from Butön’s heart son, the grammarian and epistemologist Rinchen Namgyal.
How he studied the mother tantras, such as Cakrasaṃvara, Hevajra, and others: While staying in lower Amdo, he received from the venerable Dharma lord Döndrup Rinchenpa every type of initiation, explanation, and special instruction related to the five-deity Cakrasaṃvara of the Ghaṇṭapāda system, the Ra system of Vajrabhairava, Hevajra, the Great Wheel Vajrapāṇi, and others.
1️⃣ In Shalu, he received from the great preceptor Rinchen Namgyal the initiation of Maitrīpa’s thirteen-deity Cakrasaṃvara.
1️⃣ In the Dharma fortress in Nyethang, he received from the holy lama Sönam Gyaltsen the body-mandala initiation of the Ghaṇṭapāda-system Cakrasaṃvara and also the permission ceremony for Arapacana Mañjughoṣa.
1️⃣ At the mountain cave in Shalu, he received from Khyungpo Lhepa the initiations of the Cakrasaṃvara traditions of Lūipa and Kṛṣṇācārya.
1️⃣ The explanations of the basic Cakrasaṃvara Tantra: As Jé says in his commentary on the tantra, Clarifying the Whole Hidden Meaning: The lama known as Phakpa Ö, who possessed the initiations, guidelines, and explanations of the noble lord Atiśa’s system, and the systems of Lochung and the Sakyapa, gave these to the omniscient Butön.
Lama Phakpa Ö also said he had received the explanations and oral transmission of Marpa’s and Lochung’s systems from Yangtsewa Rinchen Sengé, so he also possessed the explanatory traditions of Nāropa, who had transmitted them to the two expert translators, Marpa and Lochung.
1️⃣ I listened to the explanation and oral transmission of the venerable Butön’s Great Exposition of the root tantra from his disciple, the great lama Gongsum Dechenpa Chökyi Palwa.
1️⃣ At Sakya, Jé received from Lama Dorjé Rinchenpa the explanation of the two-chaptered root tantra of Hevajra according to the Sakya system, and at Densa Thil he received from Chenga Drakpa Jangchup the special instructions on Hevajra according to the ritual tradition of the holy lama Sönam Gyaltsenpa: the complete guidelines on the path and its result and the meaning of initiation, arranged into stages of practice.
1️⃣ 2'' Texts he studied The tantras and Indian texts related to the cycles of Guhyasamāja, Cakrasaṃvara, and Hevajra that Jé studied: With respect to the father tantra, the Guhyasamāja, he studied: the first seventeen chapters of the root tantra; the supplementary eighteenth chapter; Candrakīrti’s Bright Lamp on Guhyasamāja; the pandit Līlavajra’s Explanation of the Preface to the Guhyasamāja; Śraddhākaravarman’s Unraveling the Seven Ornaments; Master Praśāntajñāna’s Benefiting the Disciple: A Commentary on Guhyasamāja; the pandit Vimalagupta’s commentary on the first seventeen chapters, the Ornament of Guhyasamāja; the pandit Cilupa’s Precious Wish-Fulfilling Tree: A Commentary on Guhyasamāja; the Commentary on Guhyasamāja by Thagana; the pandit Vajrahāsa’s commentary on the first seventeen chapters of the Guhyasamāja; and Śāntipa’s Handful of Flowers Explaining Guhyasamāja.
1️⃣ Of explanatory tantras of Guhyasamāja, he studied: the Vajra Garland, Prophetic Intention, Compendium of Vajra Gnosis, Questions of the Four Goddesses, and others.
2️⃣ In relation to those, he studied the Commentary on the Prophetic Intention by Śraddhākaravarman, the Commentary on the Questions of the Four Goddesses by Śraddhākaravarman, and the Explication of the Questions of the Four Goddesses by Master Ānandagarbha.
2️⃣ Of meaning commentaries on the Guhyasamāja, he studied: Nāgārjuna’s Condensed Sādhanas, Mixture of Sutras, and Five Stages; Āryadeva’s Lamp Summarizing Conduct, and the explanations of it by Śākyamitra and Nāgabodhi; master Nāgabodhi’s Sequential Presentation; the seven commentaries on the Five Stages, such as Nāgabodhi’s and other commentaries; and master Śāntipa’s Precious Garland: A Commentary on the Condensed Sādhanas.
1️⃣ Output: 2 Texts he studied The tantras and Indian texts related to the cycles of Guhyasamāja, Cakrasaṃvara, and Hevajra that Jé studied: With respect to the father tantra, the Guhyasamāja, he studied: the first seventeen chapters of the root tantra; the supplementary eighteenth chapter; Candrakīrti’s Bright Lamp on Guhyasamāja; the pandit Līlavajra’s Explanation of the Preface to the Guhyasamāja; Śraddhākaravarman’s Unraveling the Seven Ornaments; Master Praśāntajñāna’s Benefiting the Disciple: A Commentary on Guhyasamāja; the pandit Vimalagupta’s commentary on the first seventeen chapters, the Ornament of Guhyasamāja; the pandit Cilupa’s Precious Wish-Fulfilling Tree: A Commentary on Guhyasamāja; the Commentary on Guhyasamāja by Thagana; the pandit Vajrahāsa’s commentary on the first seventeen chapters of the Guhyasamāja; and Śāntipa’s Handful of Flowers Explaining Guhyasamāja.
Of explanatory tantras of Guhyasamāja, he studied: the Vajra Garland, Prophetic Intention, Compendium of Vajra Gnosis, Questions of the Four Goddesses, and others.
In relation to those, he studied the Commentary on the Prophetic Intention by Śraddhākaravarman, the Commentary on the Questions of the Four Goddesses by Śraddhākaravarman, and the Explication of the Questions of the Four Goddesses by Master Ānandagarbha.
Of meaning commentaries on the Guhyasamāja, he studied: Nāgārjuna’s Condensed Sādhanas, Mixture of Sutras, and Five Stages; Āryadeva’s Lamp Summarizing Conduct, and the explanations of it by Śākyamitra and Nāgabodhi; master Nāgabodhi’s Sequential Presentation; the seven commentaries on the Five Stages, such as Nāgabodhi’s and other commentaries; and master Śāntipa’s Precious Garland: A Commentary on the Condensed Sādhanas.
1️⃣ Having harmonized the tantras, their commentaries, the subcommentaries, and the commentaries on the Five Stages literature by the pentad of the father Nāgārjuna and his four spiritual sons, along with the special instructions on them, Jé established inerrantly the meaning of the glorious Guhyasamāja Tantra.
He studied the two-chaptered root tantra of Hevajra, a yoginī tantra; the unique explanatory tantra, the Ḍākinī Vajra Tent; and the common explanatory tantra, the Saṃpuṭa, along with its supplement.
1️⃣ Of the cycle of Hevajra commentaries, he studied: the Condensed Explication of the Meaning of Hevajra by Vajragarbha; Saroruhavajra’s Possessing the Lotus; Durjayacandra’s Water Lily; Śāntipa’s Pearl Garland; the thirteen commentaries, such as Nāropa’s Great Commentary, and others; the four commentaries on the Vajra Tent, such as Indrabodhi’s Orally Transmitted Commentary on Difficult Points in the Vajra Tent; Master Abhayākaragupta’s Cluster of Instructions; and others.
Relying on the root tantras, the explanatory tantras, and the commentaries, along with their special instructions, Jé established inerrantly the meaning of the Hevajra Tantra.
1️⃣ He studied the basic Cakrasaṃvara Tantra, a yoginī tantra; and its explanatory tantras, the Supreme Expression, Vajra Ḍāka, Yoginī Conduct, Ḍāka Ocean, Vajra Source, and so forth.
1️⃣ Among commentaries, he studied: Vajrapāṇi’s Commentary in Praise of Cakrasaṃvara, and the Detailed Explications by Jayabhadra of Sri Lanka, Bhavyakīrti, Tiṣyarājacandra, and others; the Commentary on the Vajra Ḍāka by Bhavabhadra; Master Vīravajra’s Detailed Explication of Cakrasaṃvara; Upholding Reality: Commentary of the Vajra Ḍāka by the pandit Maṇibhadra; the commentary on the Ḍāka Ocean by Padmavajra, the Conveyance Commenting on the Great Royal Ḍāka Ocean Tantra; and so forth.
1️⃣ Jé trained his mind well in the root tantras and the explanatory tantras along with their commentaries and established the countless meanings of the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra.
Kālacakra studies Although Chomden Raldri, Lama Rendawa, and others disagreed, Jé believed that the Kālacakra was a great chariot-path unlike other tantra classes and traditions of explanation.
1️⃣ While he was staying in Bau Banyer, at a time when he was considering studying Kālacakra in detail with Gongsum Dechenpa Chökyi Palwa, a voice said to him in a dream: “Chökyi Palwa received teachings on the great Kālacakra commentary, Stainless Light, seventeen times from Butön Rinpoché.”
Then, when he met that lama in Nyangtö Dechen, he offered him a yellow silk as a present.
1️⃣ The next day, after offering him a bolt of blue-green silk, he requested teachings on Puṇḍarīka’s great Kālacakra commentary along with its auxiliary texts.
1️⃣ Chökyi Palwa was delighted, and said: Since you arrived just now, at the end of our study of the first chapter of the commentary, at a point where it said, “It is for the purpose of ripening anyone who is great,” this is an extremely good omen.
1️⃣ The yellow color of the silk from last night is similar to the stage of dissolution of the earth element; it means that you will accomplish the completion stage. The blue-green color of the bolt of silk from this morning is the space element, so you will complete the generation stage. I will give you all the teachings in their entirety.
Delighted, he began teaching the text where he had left off. He completed the Great Commentary, then taught it from the beginning up to the phrase where he had left off when Tsongkhapa arrived.
Hearing in their entirety the explanation of the tantric commentary, precise guidelines on ritual practice, the experiential guidelines for the six yogas, and so forth, Jé stayed through the fall, winter, and spring.
When he asked Chökyi Palwa how many times he had received teachings on the Great Commentary from Butön Rinpoché, he was told, “I heard it seventeen times.”
After that, at Penam Phakpa Mountain, he received from the precious Chökyi Palwa many ancillary teachings on Kālacakra, such as the Vajragarbha Commentary, the Vajrapāṇi Commentary, Nāropa’s Great Commentary, and others besides.
1️⃣ And, in Kyormo Lung, he received from the scholar-lama Yeshé Gyaltsen, also known as Tsalpa Tokden Ngonyelma, a detailed explanation of the great commentary, Stainless Light. He also studied dialectics, calculation, and various practical arts until he was proficient.
1️⃣ At Jonang, he received extensive teachings on the six yogas from Choklé Namgyalwa.
1️⃣ He studied the Condensed Kālacakra Tantra arranged in 1030 verses, known as the Garland Holder, as well as the Kālacakra Supplementary Tantra, the Excerpted Tantra, and other texts.
1️⃣ Of commentaries, he studied the Commentary in Sixty Thousand Stanzas by Sucandra; Puṇḍarīka’s great commentary, Stainless Light, and the commentary on the astronomy in the latter; Possessing the Lotus, by Somanātha; Puṇḍarīka’s commentary, Service of the Ultimate; and Nāropa’s Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations.
2️⃣ Jé studied those well and mastered them.
Other studies The list of earlier and later sutra and mantra texts that Jé studied is not an enumeration I made up myself; it accords with what is laid out in the biographies of Jé written by some of his direct disciples.
1️⃣ Also, an early Kadampa said, “A practitioner of the path to freedom who does not perform the activities described in an ox-load of volumes, acting as if a mere handbook suffices, will not get anywhere.”
Thus, I have written this to inform followers who are intent on freedom that they must make those great texts the basis for study and contemplation.
1️⃣ Moreover, from the Dharma lord Dönrinpa, Jé received the various lineages of Ra Lotsāwa, Kyo Lotsāwa, Nyö Gyalwa Lhanangpa, and others, on the initiation, explanation, and special instructions related to the Vajrabhairava trio of Yamāntaka, Red Bhairava, and Black Bhairava.
From Lama Umapa, he received many uncommon short lineages that were completely unknown, as well as the cycle of initiations and special instructions of Great Wheel Vajrapāṇi in the lineage from the great adept Śavaripa.
1️⃣ From Chenga Drakpa Jangchup, he received in their entirety the essential special instructions of the Kagyü, which come from Marpa and Gampopa: the six Dharmas of Nāropa, the fivefold Mahāmudrā, and the collected works of Phakmo Drupa and Drigung Jikten Gönpo.
Also, he received many essential teachings of the Sakya system from the Dharma lord and holy lama Sönam Gyaltsen and others.
1️⃣ In brief, he studied well not only the text collections on the inner sciences but also those on the common sciences: at Tsal, he studied healing practices with Lharjé Könchok Kyap; grammar, poetry, and poetics with Lochen Namsang, Sasang Mati Panchen, and others; and calculation with Tokden Yeshé Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ While he was at Tsal, he examined in detail the complete corpus of the Conqueror’s word and the treatises that had been translated into Tibetan.
In short, there was no science to be mastered that Jé did not study. Deeply learned, he thus crossed to the far shore of the ocean of the good qualities gained through extensively studying the scriptures.
How all the textual systems he studied arose as instruction If you wish to analyze this topic in detail, you will find extensive discussions in Jé’s own Song of Realization, but I will explain it briefly here nonetheless.
As Jé says in the Letter of Questions Offered to Lama Umapa: In general, there are countless secret-mantra and definition-vehicle instructions nowadays in Tibet.
It is not evident that they are not transmitted from buddhas and bodhisattvas, so if you find a reason for setting some apart, other than their just having been taught by a particular meditational deity, then you will gravitate solely to whatever directly comes to mind, and you will have no way to cause a pure ascertainment of the unmistaken key points of the path to arise.
1️⃣ Thus, intelligent ones who honestly seek an unmistaken path do not clash with or reject texts of the sutra class or the tantra class but rather embrace them.
1️⃣ Also, having followed the reasoning of a great charioteer, I distinguished well between the provisional and the definitive.
1️⃣ Since it seemed indispensable to establish arguments by reasoning that cannot be interpreted in any other way, I considered it important to study the great texts and the stainless door of reasoning through which one seeks their meaning.
1️⃣ And, while I often reached a preliminary level of understanding, I was not content with that, and motivated by the thought directed solely at the Dharma, I made continuous requests to the meditational deity and lama, who are inseparable.
1️⃣ By striving in many ways to accumulate merit and purify negativities, I now have experiential knowledge of the complete body, not just a small part, of the general scriptures and of the great treatises that comment on their meaning.
1️⃣ How that came about: Certainty is easily granted to one who crosses to the far shore of the ocean of one’s own and others’ philosophical systems.
1️⃣ He understood inerrantly the key points of the three trainings, which are the essence of the three collections of the inner sciences, the Tripiṭaka, and not settling for mere acceptance of doctrinal claims, made them part of his own experience.
2️⃣ He was nurtured by many virtuous friends who were scholar-adepts and blessed by countless superior deities.
2️⃣ I have been practicing precisely those stages that guide the disciple to enlightenment.
Also, that instruction shows how to condense into a single path-sequence countless scriptures, treatises that comment on their meaning, and special instructions, so that if one who knows how to explain explains, and one who knows how to listen practices, then, through harmonizing not just a few special instructions, but all the scriptures, understanding will occur.
2️⃣ Thus, my enumeration of guidelines is not exhaustive.
Having mostly completed study of the sutra side, Jé went to Rongchö Lung Monastery in Tsang.
There, he received various oral transmissions from its abbot, Drakpa Shenyen, and met for the first time the spiritual son of Mañjughoṣa, Lama Umapa Tsöndrü Sengé, whose secret name was Pawo Dorjé.
1️⃣ In accord with the advice of Mañjughoṣa, Lama Umapa received from Jé Rinpoché the permission ceremony of Sarasvatī and Candrakīrti’s Autocommentary on Entering the Middle Way.
1️⃣ He said to Jé, “Since my childhood, visions of Mañjughoṣa have come to me constantly; could you please make a detailed investigation of these apparitions?”
Jé Rinpoché investigated by interrogating difficult points in various textual systems and determined that they were not just ordinary visions.
Later, when he again met Umapa in Rongchö Lung, he received from him the Dharma cycle of Mañjughoṣa.
With Lama Umapa interpreting, he asked Jetsün Mañjughoṣa many Dharma questions, as will be explained below.
At that time, Mañjughoṣa urged him to intensive practice so he decided to undertake intensive practice after finishing his study of mantra.
1️⃣ Accordingly, when he had finished all his mantra study, both master and disciple went to Gawa Dong Monastery in Kyishö.
1️⃣ After doing a strict retreat, and with Lama Umapa interpreting, Jé asked Jetsün Mañjughoṣa about countless difficult points in the sutras and tantras.
1️⃣ Asked how many disciples to take on pilgrimage, Mañjughoṣa stated that Jé should take those known as the eight pure ones.
2️⃣ Up to this point, because Jé Lama had not met Mañjughoṣa directly, he asked his questions with Lama Umapa interpreting; but at this time, because Jé himself had done an intensive retreat, he had a direct vision of Arapacana Mañjughoṣa, sitting at the center of a sphere of rainbow light.
1️⃣ Then, on the advice of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, Jé decided to go away for intensive practice. Lama Umapa, who was on his way to eastern Tibet, escorted him, and master and disciple arrived in Lhasa. They assembled fine offerings under the eaves of the southern roof of the Jokhang and prayed fervently. Mañjughoṣa showed himself directly and taught verses that summarized the key points of practice. Jé memorized them and wrote them down, and he offered Umapa initiation into Guhyasamāja-Akṣobhya.
1️⃣ In the collected works of Jé, there is a sādhana of White Sarasvatī with the notation: “done at the urging of Jamyang Khaché.” In some old manuscripts of earlier times, though, there appears the notation: “Written under the Chinese-style roof of Rasa Trulnang at the urging of Lama Umapa Pawo Dorjé, by the bhikṣu Losang Drakpai Pal, who listened on many occasions to what was taught by Lama Mañjughoṣa.” Otherwise, the wording of the poem appears to be the same in the sādhana and the old manuscripts. Umapa went on to eastern Tibet, and when Jé Lama reached the age of thirty-six, nine men — the master and eight disciples — went to Ölkha Chölung for intensive practice. Immediately upon arrival, considering it vital, all of them, master and disciple alike, first worked hard at the confession practice that includes all four opponent powers.
1️⃣ No previous scholar-adept can be said to have a lifestory in which every textual system of the sutras and tantras appears as instruction. How he gained mastery of the good qualities of realization through meditation Realizations regarding vinaya Thus, Jé studied a great deal from the ages of seventeen to thirty-six. When he was thirty-six, at the urging of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, he took up the renounced life. Through a multitude of practices that accumulate merit - praying to the lama as inseparable from the meditational deity, and so forth - after four years he realized all textual systems as instruction. Then, from ages thirty-eight to fifty-three, he turned his mind to practicing not just a part of the path, but the complete body of sutra and mantra.
1️⃣ Thus, unlike those who hope for high realizations but have attained only certain good qualities common to non-Buddhists and Buddhists, he gained authentic inner realizations, just as explained in Dharma texts.
As Jé himself stated: Whatever others did for me, such as preparing a fine seat, respectfully serving me, and so forth, right there and then, without need of reflection, I thought with overwhelming sadness: "All these are impermanent, untrustworthy, like seductive illusions." Thus, from the very first, I was naturally inclined constantly to transform appearances, rejecting them in the depths of my mind as insubstantial.
At Sengé Dzong in lower Nyal, he taught many topics related to the vinaya.
1️⃣ He practiced vinaya in detail, from minor observances such as the sprinkling of water up to the major rules, and said: “The pure morality one has taken on is the basis of all good qualities.
1️⃣ I have never experienced a prātimokṣa downfall entailing expulsion, suspension, or return; such minor transgressions and infractions as do occur, I confess and vow not to repeat.”
2️⃣ In Ölkha Chölung, Jé examined the Flower Ornament Sutra and trained his mind in the awakening mind and bodhisattva conduct.
1️⃣ He practiced constantly the meditation that trains the mind in a particularly penetrating way in each of the great waves — both the mental fortitude and the conduct of a child of the Conqueror — that appear in that sutra.
1️⃣ Thus, he said: Although it is a little difficult at first, later, when you’ve grown accustomed to those qualities, effortlessly and on your own — hard as it is to fathom the wondrous mental fortitude and conduct of the Conqueror’s children — you will never know discouragement, and will engage with others in a natural and joyful manner.
1️⃣ Once when he was staying at Kyormo Lung, he entered meditative equipoise on the meaning of a sutra being recited in the assembly of monks, and he did not rise from his concentration even when the assembly of monks was dismissed.
And, as he himself said: From my early days, whenever I have been involved in detailed analysis of the meaning of scripture, my mind has not been distracted in the slightest, even when others are talking loudly in front of me or doing various things.
1️⃣ And since that time in Ölkha Jampa Ling, I also am undistracted when engaging in the practice of virtue.
Realizations regarding Madhyamaka and tantra Conversations with Mañjughoṣa How, in particular, he gained realization of the Madhyamaka view and the bliss and emptiness of the mantra vehicle: In Khedrup Jé’s Cluster of Yogic Achievements: The Secret Biography, it says that in Tsangrong, when Jé was the questioner and Lama Umapa the interpreter, he asked Jetsün Mañjughoṣa many Dharma questions.
In particular, it had been stated by the ārya father Nāgārjuna and his spiritual son Āryadeva that if you do not seek the Madhyamaka view, you will not find the life of the path; that even if you do seek it, it is very difficult to find; and that if you hold it incorrectly, the detours and disadvantages will be greater than those entailed by other mistakes, so Jé sought reality continuously and uninterruptedly, singleminded like the bodhisattva Sadāprarudita.
At that time, therefore, he mostly asked the Jetsün questions about the view.
1️⃣ On one occasion, he asked, “Is this view of mine Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka or Svātantrika Madhyamaka?” Mañjughoṣa replied, “It is neither.” At that time Jé was comfortable merely with the unwarranted view that there is nothing to be admitted and nothing to be apprehended.
1️⃣ After that, when Jé questioned him and probed for contradictions regarding the view, Jetsün Mañjughoṣa stated again and again, “It is incorrect to make the appearance side and the emptiness side completely disparate; you should give special emphasis to appearances.”
1️⃣ Many such statements were made later, too, when Jé was staying at Gawa Dong.
1️⃣ In short, Jetsün Mañjughoṣa tried urgently to reject the idea that the supreme Madhyamaka view is the nihilistic view of action and result, which claims that things only exist in the mistaken consciousnesses of others, unestablished through conventional sources of valid cognition, and that there is no way of establishing one’s own system.
1️⃣ When Jé thus questioned him and probed for contradictions, Jetsün Mañjughoṣa on various occasions taught in a highly distilled manner the seeds of a detailed investigation into the differences between Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika.
The specific differences were the coarse and subtle delimitation of the self and the object of negation of the logical reason, according to how they are apprehended by the two types of self-grasping: innate and imputed; the criteria for realization of the view; the way conventional truth is determined by the Prāsaṅgika system; and so forth.
1️⃣ In other cases, he taught in a highly distilled manner the key comparisons and distinctions between the mantra and definition vehicles: the ascertainment of the nature of the five stages of the glorious Guhyasamāja, their ordering, their enumeration, and so forth.
1️⃣ When Jé said he didn’t understand, Mañjughoṣa said: Write this down so you don’t forget it: Praying to and doing intensive retreat on the inseparable lama/meditational deity, striving well in both accumulating merit and purifying delusions, and analyzing the meaning of texts rationally and considering them in detail.
1️⃣ Satisfactorily practicing those three in a combined form is not easy, but analyze them well over an extended period, and when the time comes, and the conditions are right, these seeds that I have just now planted will ripen quickly in a mature understanding.
1️⃣ Jé had an immense desire to understand the Madhyamaka and Guhyasamāja teachings of the system of the ārya father Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons, so he asked which lama in Tibet would be the best to study these with.
2️⃣ Mañjughoṣa replied: There is no one better than Rendawa.
However, even he will not be able to arouse in you a complete understanding that severs every extreme.
1️⃣ Best would be for me to teach you with Umapa interpreting, but it seems he has to go soon to eastern Tibet.
So, from now on, do not teach, but resort to solitude and live a renounced life.
1️⃣ As explained before, strive well in practicing the three combined; meditate and perform other practices continuously, and before long, you will get their meaning.
Also, there is this passage in Lechen Künga Gyaltsen’s biographical account of Tsongkhapa’s deeds: In the autumn of the water male monkey year, when Jé had reached the age of thirty-six, he went together with Lama Umapa to Gawa Dong in the region of Ü. After setting the boundaries of their retreat, they received many cycles of Dharma teachings from Mañjughoṣa.
At that time, with Lama Umapa interpreting, Jé put countless questions to Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, on, for example, the Madhyamaka view, the differences between the mantra and definition vehicles, the difficult points of the path of highest yoga mantra, ascertaining the order and enumeration of the five stages of the completion stage of highest yoga tantra, and other issues.
Most importantly, Jé, who was relatively content with a “Madhyamaka” view based solely on the perceptions of others, in which there was nothing in one’s system to be accepted and nothing to be established, asked the noble lord, “Is this Madhyamaka view of mine a pure view?”
1️⃣ Mañjughoṣa replied, “No, because you have ascertained the emptiness side on your own but not the appearance side.”
1️⃣ When Jé asked what the differences are between Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika Madhyamaka, Mañjughoṣa said, “Examine whether overt clinging to mere appearances is or is not stopped.”
When Jé asked what textual system would be the best to study, Mañjughoṣa said, “Although in general there is no ‘good’ or ‘bad’ in the word of the Conqueror, you have a karmic connection to the Madhyamaka, so study that.”
1️⃣ When Jé asked what kind of tantra would be the best to study, Mañjughoṣa said, “Study the one scripture that has a commentary by master Candrakīrti, the Guhyasamāja Tantra.”
1️⃣ When Jé asked whether it were permissible to hold master Candrakīrti as an authority in every circumstance, Mañjughoṣa said, “How could that great bodhisattva have any confusion?”
1️⃣ Plans to visit India Just before Jé met the great preceptor Chakdorwa Namkha Gyaltsen, he thought: “I have studied well such scriptures and treatises, as well as special instructions, as now exist in the Land of Snows, and I have understood them.
1️⃣ But now, in order to sever my superimpositions, doubts, and qualms, and in particular to establish certainty about Madhyamaka and mantra, and more specifically about Guhyasamāja and Cakrasaṃvara, I should go to India and meet Nāgabodhi and others at Odantapuri, Nālandā, and other monastic universities.”
About thirteen of them, master and disciples, examined signs, dreams, and other indicators, and when their aspirations and the omens coincided, they planned with relentless determination to meet and stay with the great adept Mitrayogi in Śṛṇgeri, then go to Magadha.
When the great adept Namkha Gyaltsen found this out, he said, “If you go to India, even though you would become a great pandit who is expert in the five sciences and be made the abbot of Vajrāsana, it would shorten your life, so it would be difficult to benefit disciples.
Thus, if you stay in Tibet and pray to Mañjughoṣa, you will be cared for immediately.”
1️⃣ Asked to cancel his plans, Jé promised to do so and resolved not to go.
1️⃣ If the great adept had not stopped him then, we who live now in the Land of Snows would have missed the opportunity to taste the essential nectar that is the profound distillate of Jé Lama’s mind: the profound key points of the Madhyamaka view and Guhyasamāja, Cakrasaṃvara, and other tantras.
1️⃣ Through the kindness of Lama Namkha Gyaltsen, Jé Lama permanently settled in this land.
1️⃣ It is because Jé extensively turned the Dharma wheel and left behind so many writings that explain so well the most difficult points of Dharma that, right down to the present, so many of the fortunate have had the opportunity to enjoy here the nectar of the profound and secret Dharmas.
1️⃣ Thus, it is right that we meditate with faith and respect, remembering Namkha Gyaltsen’s and Jé Rinpoché’s kindness, and in particular, that we ourselves, who have gained a portion of the nectar-like teaching, should make diligent efforts to utilize it, never losing it to the thieves of laziness and distraction.
1️⃣ Definitive realization Even before he left for the hermitage, Jé constantly examined the key points of the Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika views but was still unable to gain enough certainty to turn back once and for all his uneasiness about the ultimate points.
On this occasion, though, at the Lhashöl hermitage in Odé Gungyal in Lhading, he strove, as instructed by Mañjughoṣa, to develop meditation on the view by way of the combined three requisites. One night, he dreamed that the holy quintet of the father Nāgārjuna and his four spiritual sons were engaged in discussion of the profound meaning, and amid this, one of them, a scholar with a large translucent bluish body, said, “I am Master Buddhapālita” and set an Indian Madhyamaka text on top of Jé’s head; this was a sign of blessing.
1️⃣ The next day, when Jé looked into the Buddhapālita Commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, he gained an unprecedented, deeply felt certainty with respect to the ultimate key points of the view of the protector Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons, the delineation of the object of negation, and so forth.
1️⃣ All fixation on apprehended signs thereby dissolved, and the superimposition that imputes the extreme of permanence onto objective reality was obliterated without remainder.
1️⃣ By virtue of the faith attained through understanding the Buddha, Jé wrote what is called the Praise of the Buddha for His Teaching of Dependent Arising: Essence of Excellent Explanation.
1️⃣ Where was he looking in the commentary when he severed superimposition?
1️⃣ In the words of my omniscient lama: When Jé Rinpoché was looking at the Buddhapālita Commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, he saw the commentary on the passage from the eighth chapter of the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, “On Agency,” that says: The agent depends on the action, And the action on the agent; I see no way of establishing them In which they do not arise dependently.
After that, it was as if he had a new way of realizing emptiness; he cited that scriptural passage many times in his own great commentary on the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way.
1️⃣ Thus my lama taught.
And, as Khedrup Jé states in his biography of Jé, the Entryway to Faith: Thus, through reasoning about the meaning of reality, he severed every last superimposition and applied himself to the concentration of single-pointed meditative equipoise on emptiness.
Through his extraordinary meditative development, nurtured well by perfect mindfulness and introspection, as Jé himself said: Now I am well developed, so even after meditation, all these various appearances arise as empty, like illusory appearances, while ordinary appearances not sealed by emptiness rarely arise on their own.
1️⃣ So, since this lifestory that delights the wise is hard to fathom, and is celebrated with a series of praises even by the conquerors and their children, it goes without saying that we should praise it, too.
Therefore, through the kindness of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, Jé Lama attained the profound Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka view, which had never been revealed in Tibet just as it is by any previous sage.
1️⃣ Because of that, it is proven that our Geden view is distinctive relative to the views of the famed Kagyü, Sakya, Jonang, and Dzokchen. “
1️⃣ Well, then,” someone might ask, “didn’t even Lama Rendawa understand the view just as it is?”
In the words of my omniscient lama, “Although on most elements of the presentation of the view, the claims of Rendawa and Jé Lama are identical, still, when it comes to clearing away the affirmative extreme by appearances and the negative extreme by emptiness, and when it comes to the way emptiness appears in cause and effect, Jé Lama’s presentation is unique.”
1️⃣ Thus, I think this was the point of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa’s saying earlier, “even Rendawa will not be able to produce in you a complete understanding that severs every extreme.
1️⃣ Realizations regarding highest yoga tantra How Jé attained realization of the two stages of highest yoga tantra: It says in Khedrup’s Secret Biography: When Jé was forty-eight and forty-nine, while staying at Jampa Ling temple in Sangngak Monastery in Ölkha, he wrote the Exposition of the Presentation of Stages of Guhyasamāja and the Great Treatise on the Stages of Mantra.
1️⃣ At that time, he stated: I understood thoroughly and well the rough meaning of, in general, the five stages and, in particular, how to achieve the illusory body of the third stage, as taught in the basic and explanatory tantras of glorious Guhyasamāja, and the uncommon meaning taught in the texts of the quintet of the ārya father Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons.
1️⃣ After that, more than ten years passed when I could not speak of it; after that, I spoke of it just a little.
1️⃣ In Okar Drak, while doing intensive retreat on Cakrasaṃvara and practicing the guidelines on the six Dharmas of Niguma, he gained many wonderful experiential realizations of what had been explained.
At Sengé Dzong in Nyal, he practiced the experiential guidelines on the sixfold yoga of Kālacakra and gained a special realization of the sixfold yoga.
1️⃣ He had a vision of the solitary Kālacakra, who told him, “For the Kālacakra tradition, your coming will be like the arrival of Sucandra.”
1️⃣ At Samten Ling in Ölkha, he had a vision in which the principal deity of the Guhyasamāja mandala, Mañjuśrīvajra, was discussing the Dharma with Mañjughoṣa and Maitreya.
The principal mandala deity gave Jé a vase filled with water, and the omniscient Butön Rinchen Drupa, sitting in the style of Maitreya on a precious throne, entrusted him with the root tantra of Guhyasamāja, saying, “Master this,” and Jé saw signs of being blessed by mantra and mudra.
1️⃣ And he attained a special ascertainment of the instruction by Marpa of Lhodrak on the ninefold cycle on mixing and transference.
1️⃣ While living in strict retreat at Ganden, he saw the thread-like light of the letters evaṃ streaming from the beginning of the central channel at the tip of his nose, down through the path of the central channel, to the lower openings.
At that, he gained the gnosis, possessed of the four joys and the four empties, that unites a special uncommon melting bliss with the realization of emptiness.
1️⃣ From then on, he continuously developed the special gnosis of bliss and emptiness so he could remain in equipoise on the gnosis of bliss and emptiness taught in the tantras.
1️⃣ And, as described in the texts of the great adepts, he attained meditative equipoise in a concentration unlike that to which some want to attach the name “gnosis of bliss and emptiness,” but that is merely akin to the concentration common to both non-Buddhists and Buddhists.
1️⃣ Also, whatever appeared in post-meditation appeared as the sport of bliss and emptiness in the circle of the deity.
2️⃣ His time passed like that.
Khedrup’s text also says: On one occasion, Jetsün Mañjughoṣa prophesied, “From now on, if you direct your efforts mainly at practicing the yogas of the generation and completion stages, then, through highest yoga mantra, you will gain a special realization; not only that, each of your seven fortunate disciples will also gain a special realization of the path.”
1️⃣ About that, Jé said, “Visions that are experienced when our inner elements are unbalanced are not very reliable, so I should ask Tokdenpa Jampal Gyatso about it.”
1️⃣ When asked, Tokdenpa said: There is no need to ask again.
1️⃣ Mentally renounce this life, and after showing the complete paths of sutra and mantra to suitable disciples, set them to meditating.
1️⃣ Jé, you yourself said that Mañjughoṣa stated: “If you apply yourself mainly to practice while on retreat, then since the inner causes for the path to arise quickly in your mind — the special gnosis of bliss and emptiness, and so forth — have already arisen in your mind, then the outer conditions — such as special helpers like human messenger goddesses — will come soon.
1️⃣ Since you also are blessed by the supreme deity Mañjughoṣa, you have completed the requisites, and you will quickly gain the path.”
1️⃣ If, on that occasion, Jé had resorted to an action seal, it would have been the cause for his manifesting the stage of union in that very life.
So that his followers would honor their celibacy — the root of the teaching — he did not resort to an action seal.
Help on the path was provided by an innate seal, as suggested by the words of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa; and, as Tokden Jampal Gyatso states: A beautiful woman continually came before Jé, wearing attractive clothes and a Tang-style flat red hat.
1️⃣ Her not coming in the aspect of a goddess seems to have resulted from his fault of showing the secrets of mantra to unsuitable recipients.
1️⃣ After Jé wrote the Wish-Fulfilling Commentary on Lūipa’s Cakrasaṃvara System, she came in the aspect of Vajrayoginī and other female buddhas and gave him special help.
1️⃣ Apparently, when erecting the three-dimensional Cakrasaṃvara mandala in the Lhasa cathedral, Jé saw goddesses singing the words and tune of the concentration blessing song and other offering songs.
1️⃣ Alternatively, it is said that the goddess Sarasvatī was his action seal.
Jé himself said: With unfettered power to achieve that path, May the heroes and ḍākinīs of the twenty-four power places Of Jambudvīpa, along with their retinues, Always assist us unstintingly.
1️⃣ And Jé also said: Through communing quickly with the helpful messenger, May there be the auspicious blazing of the banquet of bliss.
1️⃣ This will be apparent to the understanding through these various quotes.
1️⃣ With that goddess’s crucial help, Jé attained the supreme yogic achievement in the bardo.
1️⃣ As stated by Khedrup Jé: At death you manifested the clear-light dharmakāya, Your body turned into a sphere of light, And in the bardo, you attained the complete enjoyment body; I pray to the one who gained the supreme yogic achievement.
Pure visions If the pure visions he saw in just one session of concentration meditation are beyond imagining, who could describe all of them?
1️⃣ You may learn about them roughly from the Secret Biography and other texts.
And, as for Mañjughoṣa acting as the virtuous friend, it is stated in Khedrup Jé’s Entryway to Faith: In particular, he had direct visions, again and again, of the one father of all the conquerors, Jetsün Mañjughoṣa.
1️⃣ Because Mañjughoṣa acted as his virtuous friend, he did not become confused about the meaning of any text.
1️⃣ If he had difficulty in realizing what a text meant, however, he first analyzed it in detail through reasoning, and most of the time, the meaning came to him.
1️⃣ When such analyses were incapable of inducing the mental certainty in which extreme views are severed, Jé would offer a mandala and pray intently to the lama and Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, who do not differ.
3️⃣ Immediately thereafter, he could effortlessly and thoroughly consider those points and gain an irrefutable grasp of them.
1️⃣ Moreover, although the biographical details of Jé’s visions and other experiences of the body and speech of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa cannot openly be described to everyone, my account of the way he analyzed the meaning of the scriptures, of whether the analysis was complete or incomplete, of the key points of his practice, of the way his disciples were guided, of the kind of retinue he had, of the places he stayed, and so forth, is nevertheless not influenced by my own fabrications.
1️⃣ That is how it was.
How he served the teaching How Tsongkhapa acted on behalf of the teaching is twofold: a) How he laid the foundations of the teaching, and b) How he propagated and extended the teaching through the three activities of scholars.
How he laid the foundations of the teaching.
Earlier, when Jé was staying in Drabo Monastery in Lhodrak, having already accomplished the restoration of the Dzingchi temple, he thought that observing the pure vinaya training rules would be an especially good omen, one of extensive benefit to the teaching, so he prepared three Dharma robes, a begging bowl, a staff, and so forth, and a song of praise he had written, the Crown of Brahmā, and sent them to be offered to the statue of Maitreya the protector at Dzingchi.
After that, at Sengé Dzong in lower Nyal, he taught many topics related to the vinaya.
1️⃣ He practiced vinaya in detail, from minor observances such as the sprinkling of water on up to the major rules, and said: “The pure morality one takes on is the basis of all good qualities.
I have never experienced a prātimokṣa downfall entailing expulsion, suspension, or return; such minor transgressions and infractions as do occur, I confess and vow not to repeat.”
He practiced thus, and his retinue also joined him in practicing that way.
1️⃣ Later on in particular, Jé Lama, Lama Rendawa, and the great translator Kyapchok Palsang met together at Namtsé Ding.
Just over six hundred monks, headed by many Tripiṭaka masters, took the vow for the summer retreat; all three Dharma lords intended to undergo purification for the sake of the precious teaching.
1️⃣ Also, their minds resonated with the saying, “As long as the Conqueror’s inmost treasure, the vinaya, exists in full, the teaching of the Buddha will exist; without it, there is no teaching.”
1️⃣ So, with their minds intent solely on the teaching, they each gave an extensive explanation of the Vinaya Sutra.
1️⃣ At that time, they established well the way of pure observance according to the explanations of all the rules taught in the Great Group, from the subtlest up to the most important, which even present-day people can practice; and the rites found in the Great Division, which repair by name and kind all the downfalls that transgress the rules.
1️⃣ At the time, most of the monks who received teachings on the vinaya also examined their own minds.
1️⃣ They put into practice, just as they are explained, the specifications as to how many objects of confession are required for all the subtle and coarse downfalls; and when, prior to a confession-punishment, one has to forego a forbidden substance, and so forth, and they thereby corrected those downfalls.
1️⃣ From then on, most of the regular attendants examined their own minds daily and corrected their downfalls without delay.
1️⃣ Since they even took great effort in practices such as blessing the requisites, setting up the kitchen, guarding rules regarding temporary shelter, and so forth, what need is there to mention those not so hard to accomplish?
1️⃣ Thus, Jé completely restored the root of the Buddha’s teaching, the prātimokṣa foundation; his service to the teaching was extraordinary.
Therefore, in the biography by Khedrup Jé, the Entryway to Faith, it says: Nowadays, when those involved in study and reflection actually apply themselves to study and reflection and honor the basis of the training, only a certain few Tripiṭaka masters, though meditating intensely, engage in shameful wanton behavior — drinking beer, eating at the wrong times, and so forth.
Formerly, most of those at the great monasteries who had taken preliminary ordination found it difficult even to recognize the requisites of a recluse — the seat cover, begging bowl, and so forth.
1️⃣ And as for the arrangement of vertical and horizontal squares on the upper robe and lower robe, and so forth, it was unheard of.
1️⃣ Nowadays, everywhere from Kashmir to China, practitioners are in accord with the training in virtue, where one applies oneself to everything from the subtle basis of the training on up, like maintaining the pure marks and attire of recluses, giving up beer and afternoon meals, and guarding the rules about the giving and taking of food, water offerings, the maximum number of nights sleeping under one roof, and so forth.
If this situation is not due solely to the kindness of our glorious lama, Jetsün Rinpoché, by whom else, then, do you think it has occurred?”
Also, the great sage Gö Lotsāwa Shönu Pal says: Times being what they were, quite a few fully ordained monks were lax.
1️⃣ Thus, the holy Jetsün Losang Drakpai Pal first trained well in the vinaya at Kyormo Lung with the great scholar Kashipa Losalwa.
1️⃣ Later, he performed the essential practices in a solitary place and never strayed from vinaya conduct.
Still later, when caring for his retinue, he trained his entire inner circle and, just as explained in the vinaya, made them keep the necessary requisites: the three Dharma robes, the mat, the begging bowl, and so forth. Based on the special instructions of the uniquely divine noble lord Atiśa, he trained in the systems of the three types of persons, and having mentally renounced all of samsara, he arranged all the vows for the purpose of authentic individual liberation.
Through others’ emulation of his actions, the teaching of the vinaya appeared like the rising sun everywhere in the realm of Tibet.
1️⃣ This expression of praise is exactly right.
Moreover, thinking that if those sworn to the Mahayana did not observe the pure morality of the bodhisattva, they would become Mahayanists in name only, and that if those engaged in secret mantra did not properly guard the vows and pledges, they would only open the door to the lower realms, Jé gave many Tripiṭaka masters extensive explanations at Gawa Dong Monastery on the morality chapter of Asaṅga’s Bodhisattva Stages, Aśvaghoṣa’s Fifty Stanzas on the Guru, and Lakṣmīṅkara’s Fourteen Root Downfalls; and he composed explanatory texts on the morality chapter, the Fifty Stanzas on the Guru, the Fourteen Root Downfalls, and so forth.
1️⃣ Because of that, the practice of striving to guard the two higher vows and repairing them if they degenerate has persisted right up to today, and it should be recognized that this, too, stems from the kindness of Jé Lama.
2️⃣ How he propagated and extended the teaching through the three activities of scholars This is threefold: How he served the teaching by way of explanations, How he served the teaching by way of debate, and How he served the teaching by disseminating his writings, which are a garland of excellent explanation.
1️⃣ How he served the teaching by way of explanations.
When staying at Tashi Dong in Möngar, Jé taught the various biographies of Indian and Tibetan scholar-adepts.
He stated that the kashipa Sherseng had taught eleven volumes in one Dharma course; he said that that seemed to be the most taught at one time in the later period in Tibet.
Then, when his whole inner circle — Geshé Shatön and others — asked Jé himself to teach that many at one time, he said that it seemed he could teach that many if he made the effort.
When they urgently requested him again, he promised to do so.
That month, he isolated himself from the tenth to the new-moon day, reading and analyzing manuscripts.
1️⃣ On the day of the new moon, he bound all the manuscripts with a belt.
He had hoped to start the Dharma course on the first of that month, but he had to await the arrival of many Tripiṭaka masters who were coming from particular monasteries like Sangphu and others, so for about three days he taught some miscellaneous oral traditions of Marpa, Milarepa, and others.
On a single day, the fifth day, he simultaneously began teaching fifteen texts, from their opening “In the language of India.”
Each day, teaching without break from early morning until midnight, he gave explanations in fifteen sessions.
1️⃣ When he had finished teaching the two shortest volumes of the original fifteen, he started two other short ones in their place.
1️⃣ He explained seventeen treatises: Dharmakīrti’s Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition; the perfection of wisdom, that is, Maitreya’s Ornament of Higher Realization; the pair of abhidharmas, the higher, which is Asaṅga’s Compendium of Abhidharma, and the lower, Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Higher Knowledge; Guṇaprabha’s Vinaya Sutra; the other four of the five books of Maitreya; five of Nāgārjuna’s six collections of Madhyamaka reasoning; Candrakīrti’s Entering the Middle Way; Āryadeva’s Four Hundred Stanzas; and Śāntideva’s Way of the Bodhisattva.
For some of the most difficult texts, he established, with refutations and proofs, many modes of commentarial explanation that went beyond those set out in the great Tibetan commentaries.
For most other texts, he gave detailed explanations on every hard or easy passage on the basis of their own commentaries.
He finished this task in three months.
1️⃣ On that same occasion, whenever he was free from Dharma teaching, he uninterruptedly performed the yogas of the two stages of his meditational deity, Vajrabhairava, including self-initiation, and so forth.
1️⃣ At that time, too, everyone agreed that it could not have happened thus unless it were certain either that he was directly blessed by a superior deity or that he was a great bodhisattva who had attained the power of nonforgetting.
1️⃣ Reports are in agreement on this.
This is a most unusual ordinary biography; there is no such story about any previous sage.
At Radreng, after harmonizing well such great texts as Maitreya’s Ornament of Mahayana Sutras and Asaṅga’s Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes, Compendium of Abhidharma, Stages of the Śrāvakas, and others, he gave a thorough explanation of tranquil abiding, and when he allowed his students to meditate, a special experience of tranquil abiding, concordant with scripture, arose in the minds of some.
He taught the quintessence of the Kadam special instructions, which is the teaching on how to meditate on the conventional awakening mind of equalizing and exchanging self and other, condensed into a clear order for practice, and adorned it with Mañjughoṣa’s special instructions on ultimate awakening mind. The Rays of the Sun of Mind Training and other texts were developed based on the notes taken by Hortön Namkha Pal during the teachings.
2️⃣ At Lhepu Gönsar, he taught to many Tripiṭaka masters all the principal subjects of Dharmakīrti’s Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition as they apply to practice.
1️⃣ When he taught his interpretation of the text according to the stages of the path, the scholars were utterly captivated by the nectar of this unprecedented excellent explanation.
1️⃣ Before then, it was said that studying valid cognition was necessary only for broadly understanding external phenomena but had no relevance to internal practice.
1️⃣ Thenceforth, though, the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition became a supreme treatise for showing practice.
1️⃣ Gyaltsap Jé Rinpoché took notes on what Jé taught at that time.
1️⃣ Jé wished to teach the perfection of wisdom, so he suggested to his retinue that they each offer butter lamps.
1️⃣ Gyaltsap Jé put a wick into a huge copper pot filled with clarified butter.
2️⃣ Seeing it lit, Jé thought it was a particularly good omen, so he collected all the other butter lamps into that huge pot.
2️⃣ Then Jé Rinpoché taught the application of yogic practice to the meaning of the perfection of wisdom according to the special instructions taught to him by Jetsün Mañjughoṣa.
2️⃣ Gyaltsap Jé also took notes on that and then wrote the Ornament of Essential Expositions, which is a great treasure that eloquently explains what no previous sage could evince.
1️⃣ When it comes to secret mantra, Jé’s spiritual heir Khedrup Jé wrote a great commentary to accord with Jé’s extensive teaching at Ganden on the great Kālacakra commentary, Stainless Light.
1️⃣ Also, after harmonizing all the tantras and Indian texts of the Yamāntaka cycle, Khedrup Jé wrote the Great Generation Stage of Vajrabhairava according to what Jé had taught, and Dülzin wrote a textbook according to Jé’s teachings on the three families of the action tantras and on the performance tantras.
1️⃣ Moreover, many disciples took notes on Jé’s teaching on the generation and completion stages of Cakrasaṃvara and Guhyasamāja.
1️⃣ In brief, even when Jé was very young and living in lower Amdo, he gave explanations of Maitreya’s Ornament of Mahayana Sutras.
1️⃣ Having arrived in central Tibet, he began in Nenying with an explanation of Asaṅga’s Compendium of Abhidharma.
2️⃣ At the temple at Keru in Ön, he taught many topics, such as the perfection of wisdom, valid cognition, Madhyamaka, and so forth to the governor of Tsakho and others.
1️⃣ At Dewachen and Jayül in upper Ü, he repeatedly taught the perfection of wisdom, valid cognition, Madhyamaka, and Asaṅga’s Compendium of Abhidharma.
At Kyormo Lung, Dewachen, Tölung Tsomé, and the five lineage temples on Ngangkar Sinpo Mountain, he repeatedly taught the Tripiṭaka.
1️⃣ At the rock cave at Kyormo Lung, he repeatedly taught Kālacakra, the perfection of wisdom, Madhyamaka, and other topics.
At Rapdrong in upper Nyal, he repeatedly taught the profound and extensive Dharma to many Tripiṭaka masters, and he repeatedly taught the Dharma at Lungra Chenmor Drak, Garphuk in Ölga, Ei Teura, and Nyangpo Dangdo.
1️⃣ At the Potala, he repeatedly taught such topics as Kamalaśīla’s Light of Madhyamaka, the vinaya, the stages of the path, and so forth, to many hundreds of disciples, principally many scholars headed by the abbots of the great monasteries: the trio of Sangphu, Dewachen, and Gungthang, and the trio of Ganden, Kyormo Lung, and Sül Chölung.
At this time, the upholder of the Sakya teaching, Rongtön Shākya Gyaltsen, bowed at Jé’s feet and received teachings on the stages of the path, although in the biographies of Rongtön written by Shākya Chokden and others, this fact, like a buried treasure, is not revealed.
1️⃣ At Gawa Dong, Jé gave extensive explanations of the morality chapter of Asaṅga’s Bodhisattva Stages, Aśvaghośa’s Fifty Stanzas on the Guru, and Lakṣmīṅkara’s Fourteen Root Downfalls.
1️⃣ At Radreng, he taught many topics at different times: the earlier and later versions of the stages of the path, and so forth.
1️⃣ At Drigung, he frequently taught the Dharma to the Tripiṭaka masters there, headed by Gushri and Drigung Lotsāwa.
At Ön Dechen Teng, he taught many guidelines for the stages of the path and about difficult points of Madhyamaka and valid cognition.
1️⃣ At Ölkha Jampa Ling, he taught the generation and completion stages and, at Jangchup Lung, the stages of the path of mantra.
1️⃣ While in retreat at Sera Chöding, he taught the five stages of Guhyasamāja and some of the completion-stage practices of the mother tantras.
At Sera, before about six hundred monks, he taught Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, his own Distinguishing Provisional and Definitive, Āryadeva’s Four Hundred Stanzas, his own Stages of the Path of Secret Mantra, his Exposition of the Basic Downfalls, Aśvaghoṣa’s Fifty Stanzas on the Guru, and other texts; and he also gave extensive guidelines on the stages of the path.
1️⃣ Then, at Drumbu Lung in Kyimé before at least a thousand monks, he repeatedly taught the stages of the path, the completion stage of the mother tantra Cakrasaṃvara, and other topics.
Again, at Sera Chöding, before about six hundred Tripiṭaka masters, he repeatedly taught on Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, the morality chapter of Asaṅga’s Bodhisattva Stages, Vitapāda’s All-Good Sādhana Collection, the stages of the path, and other topics.
1️⃣ At Sangri Chin, before Chenga Sönam Sangpo and others, he repeatedly taught the sutra and mantra approaches to the stages of the path, and so forth.
1️⃣ At Samten Ling in Ölkha, he taught various topics.
1️⃣ Then he went to the great throne site at Ganden Mountain and gave countless teachings on the difficult points of the stages of the path, Candrakīrti’s Bright Lamp, Nāgārjuna’s Five Stages, Asaṅga’s Compendium of Abhidharma, Asaṅga’s five treatises on the stages, valid cognition, and other topics.
1️⃣ Again, at Tashi Dokha in Ön, before hundreds of Tripiṭaka masters, he extensively taught Madhyamaka, valid cognition, the stages of the path, and so forth.
After that, he returned to Ganden; for many years there, he taught innumerable profound Dharmas, principally the explanatory traditions of the four classes of tantra, and so forth.
He gave countless teachings, these above all: teachings on Candrakīrti’s Guhyasamāja commentary, Bright Lamp, including the annotations; extensive guidelines on Nāgārjuna’s Five Stages; extensive guidelines on the six yogas of Kālacakra; extensive teachings on Puṇḍarīka’s great Kālacakra commentary, Stainless Light; many teachings about Cakrasaṃvara; explanations of Madhyamaka and valid cognition; guidelines for the stages of the path; and other topics.
Then, at glorious Drepung, before about two thousand scholars, he made the Muni’s teaching as bright as sunlight, turning the vast wheel of such Dharmas as: guidelines for the stages of the path, guidelines for the six Dharmas of Nāropa, Candrakīrti’s Entering the Middle Way, the Guhyasamāja tantra, and so forth.
In this regard, it says in the Blue Annals, “The great being Künsangwa stated: ‘Because he was lord of the teaching, even one explanation by Jé Lama on topics explained hundreds of times by others became a victory banner that never disappeared.’”
1️⃣ This quotation is exactly right.
1️⃣ How he served the teaching by way of debate.
1️⃣ When Jé was nineteen years old, he went on the debate circuit related to the perfection of wisdom, traveling to Sangphu, Dewachen, Sakya in Tsangrong, Dar Sangden, Garong Chödé in Ngamring, Chödra Chenpo É, Nenying, and other places.
Later, he went on the debate circuit related to the other four greatly difficult subjects, traveling to Sakya, Sangphu, Tsethang, and other places.
On those occasions, before many hundreds of experts on scripture and reasoning, he established the meaning of the major textual systems through refutation and investigation; his reasoning, supported by the evidence, destroyed the arrogance of countless opponents.
The assembly of impartial scholars was moved to deeply felt faith by his splendid discipline, and spontaneously bowed in respect.
1️⃣ At that time, reports of his sagacity filled Jambudvīpa, so whenever a debate circle was assembled in front of Jé Lama, no one would step forward to debate him.
Although some at first came wanting to debate him, when they met him and heard his excellent explanations of the teaching, they were utterly captivated and became his disciples.
1️⃣ For example, when the three lamas came together at Namtseng Deng to turn the wheel of Dharma, Karma Könchok Shönu said: Lotsāwa Kyapchok Palsang and I can debate, with Rendawa and Tsongkhapa as witnesses.
1️⃣ Alternatively, Rendawa and I can debate; that would also be fine.
1️⃣ But, at this point, I should not debate Lama Losang Drakpa.
1️⃣ He has the excellent awakening mind from previous lives, so he has no prejudice, even against those who propound debased philosophical systems.
1️⃣ It is known that he was scolding Kyapchok and Rendawa for being biased.
1️⃣ It says in the Short Biography by Tokden Jampal Gyatso: He was renowned for having the three qualities of sagacity, purity, and goodness, so his fame pervaded this Land of Snows, and it seems that he was also held in respect by all who, like Karma Könshön, are high minded.
Still, if they are not refuted through scripture and reasoning, incorrect statements, even if they occur in texts by this or that famous sage of India or Tibet, lead to detours on the perfect path and should not be politely ignored.
When it comes to making refutations with hundreds of scriptural and rational arguments, it is obvious that what is clear and extensive in the precious writings of Jé does not exist in the teachings of even the most elevated of other scholars of the Land of Snows, such as Sakya Pandita, Ngok Lotsāwa, Butön, and others.
1️⃣ Likewise, when it comes to Jé’s own point of view, even when opponents trained in logic disputed and analyzed it hundreds of times, they could not move him even an inch from his thesis.
1️⃣ Thus, Khedrup Jé says: Even examined a hundred times by countless opponents With training in logic, your words, O protector, Cannot be altered by even an inch; To you who possess a mind that is pure, I pray.
Later, such scholars as Rongtön Mawai Sengé, Ngorpa Künsang, Gorampa Sönam Sengé, Shākya Chokdenpa, Taktsang Lotsāwa, and others secretly wrote a great deal of literature opposing the writings of Jé, using whatever native intelligence they had, but Khedrup Jé and, later, the omniscient Sera Jetsünpa, Khedrup Lekchöpa, and other direct disciples and grand-disciples of Jé reduced them to ashes with a scriptural and logical deluge of diamond fire.
1️⃣ Their own analytical limbs became bound by the tattered ropes of the negations and affirmations they propagated; as this is an appearing object perceived by those with the eye of wisdom, I have not bothered to prove here what is already proven.
1️⃣ How he served the teaching by disseminating his writings, which are a garland of excellent explanation. How he wrote great texts on sutra-vehicle traditions.
At the upper monastery of Radreng, Jé prayed for many days and nights before the statue of the noble lord Atiśa known as the “great image whose head inclines left,” and he had a vision for a month of the lineage gurus, from Śākyamuni down to the great preceptor Namkha Gyaltsen, and in particular of the noble lord Atiśa, Dromtönpa, Potowa, and Sharawa.
1️⃣ They gave him many instructions and follow-up teachings, and at the end, Potowa, Dromtönpa, and Sharawa dissolved into the lord.
1️⃣ Atiśa placed his hand on Jé’s head and said, “You must perform expansive service for the teaching, and I will also help you achieve enlightenment and act for the sake of sentient beings.”
Then he disappeared. At that time, Jé wrote the Prayer to the Lineage of the Stages of the Path, Which Opens the Door to the Supreme Path.
Since special signs like that arose and the omens were well configured, he wrote the Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path of the Three Persons.
Then, leaving out many of the refutations and proofs and scriptural quotations, he wrote the Small Treatise on the Stages of the Path, Which Clearly Shows the Essential Meaning of the Great Treatise.
The stages of the path literature is distinctive because of five special qualities: distinctive subject matter, that is, the three principal aspects of the path, the teaching given to Jé himself by Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, which is adorned by the noble lord Atiśa’s special instructions regarding the three types of person, distinctive mode of exposition, that is, cutting off detours from the path and presenting the nature of the path without error, the order of the path without confusion, and the enumerations of the path without excess or deficiency, distinctive requesters, that is, the great preceptor Sülphuwa, the great translator Kyapchok Palsang, Drigung Chöjé, and others, distinctive place, that is, Radreng, the conqueror Dromtönpa’s hermitage, and distinctive retinue, that is, great beings such as the two spiritual heirs, Gyaltsap and Khedrup Jé, and others.
1️⃣ Although there are many Kadam stages of the path texts, Jé’s stages of the path texts are distinctive compared even to those.
As Khedrup Jé states: The stages of the path teaching tradition of the great noble lord, the glorious Atiśa; the many levels of written instructions composed by the great geshés of the textual and special-instruction lineages; the many earlier and later examples of sayings from the great bodhisattvas Potowa, Chengawa, and Chekawa; and the Great and Small Treatises on the Stages of the Teaching by the great geshé Drolungpa, who followed the teachings of the great geshé Khampa Lungpa, and so forth: all these are stages of the path traditions that delight the conquerors, follow the great scriptures, are adorned with the oral teachings or speech of the lineage of the holy gurus, and are marvelous entryways to pleasing the wise.
1️⃣ Even so, these books of excellent discourse written by the omniscient Jé — the teachings of the Great and Small Treatises on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment — are unsurpassable, uniquely marvelous texts, such as have never before been revealed in the Land of Snows by anyone.
They incorporate every single scripture, as well as the commentaries on their meaning, and the enumeration and ordering of the full body of the path — which are the necessary conditions for an individual’s awakening — as well as the general body of the path — the way to integrate successive meditation topics into your own experience by turning them over in your mind — and all the individual limbs of the path.
2️⃣ Making a detailed investigation with unbiased intelligence as to how this is so, you should develop conviction of this.
1️⃣ At that time, many virtuously inclined primeval great gods, such as Nyenchen Thanglha, Shoklha Gyukpo, and others, provided the cooperative conditions: they came directly before Jé in nomad costumes and, after offering him yogurt, cheese, and so forth, petitioned him: “Include us in your prayer.”
Thus, Jé wrote: In all their lives, may every human and nonhuman who has provided Cooperative conditions for arranging this text on the good path And has cleared away contradictory conditions Never be separated from the pure path praised by the conquerors.
When Jetsün Mañjughoṣa said to Jé, “Isn’t my teaching on the three principal aspects of the path sufficient?”
Jé replied, "I made that the principal subject; I wrote more extensively by adorning it with the special instructions of Atiśa." There is that and other wonderful stories as well.
At Gungthang in Tsal, he wrote a commentary on the perfection of wisdom, the Golden Rosary of Excellent Explanation, and the scholars were captivated.
Even Taktsang Lotsāwa, on seeing this excellent explanation, had his mountain of pride cast down, and attained the faith of a Dharma follower with regard to Jé Lama and praised him sincerely: I see the extent of the lotus garden of the perfection of wisdom sutras and the Ornament of Higher Realization Opened by your sun-like intellect, though you are still a youth, And the night lily of my conceit closes up; I pray to you, O treasury of knowledge deep and vast.
1️⃣ At Sera Chöding, when he was planning to write a commentary on Nāgārjuna's Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, he encountered difficulties on some of the subtle points of reasoning.
He prayed intently to Jetsün Mañjughoṣa and saw, filling space, a list of the twenty emptinesses of the perfection of wisdom sutras in letters the color of refined gold. He thereby resolved every single point of doubt and wrote the Ocean of Reasoning Explaining the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way.
In that same place, he wrote the Essence of Excellent Explanation: A Treatise Distinguishing Provisional and Definitive in the Scriptures.
1️⃣ The difficult points in that text were such that no previous Tibetan sage realized those points just as they are: not such deeply learned men as Ngok Lotsāwa, Sakya Pandita, Butön, and others; not those known as the eight great lions, such as Chapa Chökyi Sengé and the others who had struggled along the path of reasoning; not the omniscient Dölpopa and others not lacking in qualities of higher realization.
1️⃣ Jé, on the other hand, through the kindness of the noble lord Mañjughoṣa, saw them clearly, and as stated in the Essence of Excellent Explanation: Even those deeply learned in the scriptures, Those who struggled along the path of reasoning, And the many who did not lack in accumulation of qualities of higher realization: Strive though they did, they did not gain such realization.
1️⃣ Through the kindness of Lama Mañjughoṣa, though, I have seen well, And I will explain with thoughts of utmost love.
1️⃣ How he wrote great texts on mantra-vehicle traditions When Jé was staying in upper Gyasok, he had visions of the actual physical forms of many scholars, such as Ārya Nāgārjuna, Āryadeva, Buddhapālita, Nāgabodhi, Candrakīrti, Asaṅga and Vasubandhu, Dignāga, Dharmakīrti, Guṇaprabha and Śākyaprabhā, Devendrabuddhi, Prajñākaragupta, Kamalaśīla, Abhayākaragupta, and others; and many great adepts, such as King Indrabhūti, the great brahman Saraha, Master Lūipa, Ghaṇṭapa, Kṛṣṇācārya, and others.
1️⃣ Thinking the visionary experiences were probably unreliable, Jé asked Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, who replied, “These visionary experiences did not come randomly, so you should make strong prayers.
This is an omen that extensive benefits will accrue to you and others from relying on the texts of these beings.”
Later, when Jé was staying in the Lhashöl hermitage at Jampa Ling Monastery in Odé Gungyal, the Jetsün told him, “You should write an explanation of Master Nāgabodhi’s Sequential Presentation; great benefit will accrue.”
1️⃣ Thus exhorted, Jé immediately wrote the Exposition of the Presentation of Stages.
1️⃣ Jé stated: I understood thoroughly and well the rough meaning of, in general, the five stages and, in particular, how to achieve the illusory body of the third stage, as taught in the basic and explanatory tantras of glorious Guhyasamāja, and the uncommon meaning taught in the texts of the quintet of the ārya father Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons.
1️⃣ After that, more than ten years passed when I could not speak of it; after that, I spoke of it just a little.
At that place, at the urging of Lotsāwa Kyapchok Pal Sangpo, and at the particular urging of the glorious Phakmo Drupa regent, Chenga Sönam Sangpo, Jé also wrote the Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path of Vajradhara, a great treatise that elucidates the entirety of the paths of the four classes of tantra.
1️⃣ In the words of Jé himself, “Apart from being told at Gyasok Phu that great benefit would be accomplished through relying on the texts of those earlier great adepts and Abhayākaragupta, I did not have any other particular reasons for writing.
1️⃣ When I wrote the text, the time passed very quickly, and I did not pray or perform other practices for a long time.”
1️⃣ While living in strict isolation at Samten Ling in Ölkha, Jé prayed intently to the lama who was inseparable from the meditational deity many times and arrived at the decision to write the Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages, on the completion stage of glorious Guhyasamāja.
1️⃣ While setting down notes for the book, he had a wonderful dream in which someone said, “moon above tiger.”
1️⃣ You can learn the meaning of those words in detail from Khedrup Jé’s Secret Biography, but essentially it indicates that the special instructions on the Ārya system of Guhyasamāja and on Cakrasaṃvara will be elucidated by Jé himself.
1️⃣ In the Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages, Jé says, “Because I prayed for a long time, I obtained the special sign giving me permission to write the text.”
1️⃣ Also, in the Direct Explanation of the Five Stages, he says, "I obtained the firm sign I desired."
2️⃣ The meaning of both is the same.
Having realized this meaning in that very place, Jé wrote that great treasure of excellent explanation of Guhyasamāja called the Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages, as well as the Direct Explanation of the Five Stages and expositions of the two explanatory tantras, the Questions of the Four Goddesses and the Compendium of Vajra Gnosis.
At the great monastic seat of Ganden, he made detailed corrections to the translation of Candrakīrti's Guhyasamāja commentary, Bright Lamp, and wrote the Precious Sprout that Severs Extremes, which, through annotations that explain in detail the meanings of the words of the Bright Lamp, covers both the individual chapters and the general points of difficulty; he also wrote the Condensed Meaning of the Bright Lamp, which examined the individual topics of the Bright Lamp.
He also wrote many textbooks on the Cakrasaṃvara cycle, such as the Rite Based on Lūipa's Higher Realization; the commentary on that, Wish-Fulfilling; the commentary on the root tantra, Clarifying the Whole Hidden Meaning; the extensive and condensed discussions of the great completion stage; and, also on the completion stage, the Eye-Opener for Viewing the Hidden Meaning; and so forth.
1️⃣ As just described, the writings of the great Jé are not just what he felt like writing; rather, he saw definite signs that his writing would be of benefit to the teaching and to beings, as when he had a vision of the great adepts in bodily form, and other experiences.
1️⃣ Urged to write this or that by Jetsün Mañjughoṣa, he did just that.
Since the essential meaning, ordering, and other elements, even of such shorter texts as the Crown of Brahmā: Praise of Maitreya, Precious Illuminating Lamp, the Sukhāvatī Prayer, and other works, were formulated according to Mañjughoṣa's word, it goes without saying in regard to the great treatises.
1️⃣ In these great texts, by basing himself on the works of Ārya Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons, which reveal the key points of the two stages hidden in the root tantras of the highest yoga tantras, Jé clarified the marvelous teaching that is revealed when the basic and explanatory tantras are properly connected.
2️⃣ This had been beyond the ken of any previous scholar-adept.
1️⃣ In the Annotations Clarifying the Meaning of the Five Stages, he states: In the great nectar ocean of glorious Guhyasamāja, Through Nāgārjuna’s special instruction, which clarifies the meaning hidden there, I have churned again and again with the supreme churning rod of the explanatory tantra, Which is tied by the excellent churning rope of intelligence that, in relation to the king of tantras, Distinguishes between practice that arises as instruction and the subtle path of reasoning; I have found the vase, never before seen in this land, Filled with the nectar of the meaning of the tantra’s words, Clarifying the essential meanings of the words from every angle.
Also, in the Cluster of Yogic Achievements, a text on the completion stage of Cakrasaṃvara, he states: Regarding the completion stage of the great adepts, The points most difficult to realize Through the basic and explanatory tantric texts Were not till now well elucidated in this land.
But I, with great diligence And through long striving, have understood them.
1️⃣ Listen now, as I explain them here.
1️⃣ Thus, Khedrup Jé stated: Seeing just as they are the profound key points Of the two stages of the ultimate path, which had not till now Been experienced by others in this land, you made attainment Of that goal your essential practice; to you I pray.
1️⃣ What he said was exactly right and not just poetic hyperbole.
Suppose someone were to ask, “Well, then, what are the profound points of the two stages that were never previously revealed?”
Well, with respect to the generation stage, many teachings on the full meaning of the sādhanas elucidated by the great adepts, on such topics as the meditative objects intended for the tantras — from meditation with gnosis to the dissolution of the mandala — had not been revealed by any previous Tibetan lama.
With respect to the completion stage in particular, Jé provided many singular explanations of the individual stages of the path, beginning from the isolated body and going up to how one arises in divine form in the union of no more learning.
Above all, he clarified precisely the intent of the ārya father Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons as to the marvelous way you achieve the illusory body based on the wind-mind that has traversed the four empties.
If such things are not clear even in the writings of Marpa, Gö Khukpa, the early Sakyapas, the omniscient Butön, and others, what need be said about other lesser sages?
Faith in Tsongkhapa When the intelligent are long acquainted with the writings of Jé and his spiritual sons and see their exceptional qualities, they arouse the faith that follows from seeing things as they truly are.
As stated in the biography of Jamyang Chöjé: At the Potala, Chöjé said: “It says in the Wishing Tree of Higher Realization, by the great Jetsün Drakpa Gyaltsen: When I remember the kindness of the assembled gurus Who teach these things, I shed tears of faith.
1️⃣ Always, I bow to the stainless lotus feet Of those most supreme gurus. “
1️⃣ We ourselves cannot measure the minds of the great Jetsün and Jé Rinpoché.
1️⃣ The Dharma texts they wrote, the Wishing Tree of Higher Realization and the Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages, are so vastly and immeasurably distinguished that tears flow when we recall the kindness of the assembly of gurus who have taught these things.
1️⃣ The Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages should evoke tears because it has the rare quality of being well explained.
1️⃣ It is the one pure door for entering the teaching, yet no one enters — and my own ability only goes so far.”
1️⃣ He said this, his voice shaking, weeping, and all the officials and servants wept, too.
Even Taktsang Lotsāwa praised him, saying: To you who are the great treasure of unprecedented excellent explanation Regarding all of sutra and mantra, especially the Vajrayana, All the tantra classes, especially highest yoga, And everything within the two stages, especially the illusory body; to you I bow.
1️⃣ This, it seems, reflects the judgment of one with impartial intelligence.
Through long, detailed acquaintance with the writings of Jé, one will understand them, but how can someone like me express them exactly?
1️⃣ Those who claim to uphold the Geluk teaching should at the very least be able just to identify Jé’s uniquely excellent explanations.
Nowadays, however, it seems that most of those who are in the position of being great upholders of the teaching are satisfied exclusively with the color of their hats.
1️⃣ Final years In the year of the female earth ox, Jé commemorated in Lhasa the miraculous deeds of the Buddha.
After that, as prophesied by the conqueror, he founded Ganden Nampar Gyalwa Ling on the great Drok Mountain, and he turned the Dharma wheel there for a long time.
1️⃣ At the age of sixty-three, in the year of the female earth pig, he manifested final nirvana at Ganden Nampar Gyalwa Ling.
1️⃣ According to authoritative scripture, he took birth before Maitreya in Tuṣita heaven and was called Mañjuśrīgarbha, the Conqueror’s son; and, in the future, he will attain manifest, perfect buddhahood and will be called Tathāgatha Siṅghasvara.
1️⃣ Why Tsongkhapa is extraordinary These expressions of the qualities of greatness of Jé Lama have been compiled from just some of the most important material I have seen in written biographies and heard through authoritative statements.
At this degenerate time, I wrote this mainly to show how Jé, like the sun, illumined the pure teaching in the land of Tibet.
2️⃣ There are some significant biographical details that did not emerge here, but faith may be developed through learning them from other sources.
1️⃣ In terms of detailed expressions, Vajrapāṇi said to the great adept from Lhodrak, Namkha Gyaltsen, “Even I, Vajrapāṇi, cannot comprehend the extent of the good qualities of Matibhadra.”
1️⃣ If even the holder of the treasury of the secret teachings of all the conquerors, Vajrapāṇi, says he cannot fathom the extent of Jé’s qualities, than what is there to say of others?
1️⃣ As to the main biography of Jé, Tokden Jampal Gyatso asked Jetsün Mañjughoṣa for the lifestory of Jé Rinpoché.
1️⃣ Mañjughoṣa replied, “The lifestory of Jé cannot be encompassed by thought.
1️⃣ The main point of his lifestory is how he comprehended all dharmas in their profundity through clearly discerning the nature of dharmas, and how he comprehended the triad of basis, path, and result through reasoning based on the way things are; this is it.”
1️⃣ And, as Mañjughoṣa also said, “He established authoritatively how the approaches of the mantra and definition vehicles are effective methods for one individual’s awakening; this is the principal meaning of the extraordinary lifestory of this great being.”
In short, as my own omniscient lama wrote in his Great Treatise on the Establishment of Philosophical Systems: Although the common and the uncommon lifestories of the great lord Jé cannot be encompassed by thought, still, in all of them, the main point is how he himself, without even the subtlest bit of confusion, and without mixing them up, ascertained by means of stainless scripture and reasoning the intended meanings of the countless scriptures of sutra and mantra of the conquerors, exactly as they had been opened by the great charioteers; and how, when he gave teachings to others, his kindness in completely explaining the precious teaching of the Muni made the teaching pervade the whole world — it’s just that.
This should be known by the wise.
1️⃣ Thus, on the sutra side from the fine points of the practice of the vinaya on up to the great philosophical systems, and on the mantra side from the fine points of mandala rites and praxis on up to the great tantric commentaries, any and all of these Jetsün Tsongkhapa traced back to the intention of the great scholars and adepts, who opened the way for each system, never covering his teachings with the flaws of “easy Dharma” or personal invention.
1️⃣ What’s more, his teachings can be traced back to the word of the Conqueror.
Also, one is granted certainty about every subtle point that is analyzed through scripture and reasoning; in that way, and in the way that all teachings are presented as noncontradictory and mutually supportive, the teachings are arranged as necessary conditions for the awakening of one individual.
No previous scholar-adept in the Land of Snows had such a lifestory, in which both parts of the teaching, the explanatory and the practical, were upheld and propagated. Not only that, but even someone like Ārya Nāgārjuna of the Holy Land of India is in no way superior to Jé; this is proven by the fact that Jé’s mode of reasoning is also stainless.
1️⃣ Therefore, what chance is there that Jé’s lifestory is like the lifestories that rely on the mere prophecy of others who say, “This being was prophesied by so and so and such and such”?
1️⃣ Although one learns from them that he obtained many visions of meditational deities, and many concentrations and supernormal powers, and so forth, the principal aspect of his lifestory is what was just explained.
1️⃣ Jé Lama himself said: In the beginning, I frequently sought extensive study.
1️⃣ In the middle, all the textual systems arose as instruction.
At the end, I practiced all through the day and night.
All of that I have dedicated to extending the teaching.
1️⃣ 1126 At the very start, Jé Rinpoché’s approach was to seek far and wide to study in detail the words of the Conqueror and the countless textual systems of the great charioteers who had commented on the meaning of those words, and not just in a vague or biased manner.
And based on that, through appropriately condensing countless sutras and treatises, from the Stanzas on Vinaya up to the glorious Guhyasamāja, into the main and ancillary aspects of a path that awakens one individual, all textual systems arose for Jé as instruction.
1️⃣ And accordingly, based on his practice of spontaneously engaging all the time with the perfectly complete body of the path that arose for him, he ascertained the key points of the path through experiences whose doorway was stainless reasoning.
1️⃣ So, the result of the perfect reasoning by which he nailed down an unmistaken understanding was, in general, that his actions enlisted all teachings without contradiction, and in particular, there were Jé’s own texts on sutra and mantra.
1️⃣ No matter how much you examine Jé’s words, you will not find in them even an iota to blame, whether for irrelevance, repetition, contradiction, or going outside the authoritative scriptures of the Muni, for they are established through direct perception.
1️⃣ Whatever I have stated accorded with this; this teaching is a particularly distinctive synopsis of Jé’s lifestory.
For these reasons, that sun of speech, Khedrup Jé, said: To you who have the power of limitless prayer and, with skillful methods, Effortlessly and spontaneously leads the assembly of countless students Onto the path that delights the conquerors, To you, the refuge of all the worlds, I pray.
At a time when the clergy only generalized about explanation, practice, And reasoning, and the “teaching of the Muni” was only nominal, You shone the sun on every holy Dharma of the Conqueror — The scriptures and realizations of the three trainings — so to you I pray.
1️⃣ I scatter with faithful hands the flowers of praises of the abiding meaning. The Geluk Tradition: Tsongkhapa’s Successors.
1️⃣ The History of Philosophical Systems in Tibet, the Land of Snows. The histories of the different schools. The history of the Geluk philosophical system. How the stainless tradition of Jé Lama was expanded by subsequent upholders of the teaching.
THE DISCUSSION of how Jé Lama’s stainless tradition was expanded by subsequent upholders of the teaching is threefold: How his system was expanded by Jé’s direct disciples, How subsequent disciples served that system, and A general synopsis of the biographies of those upholders of the teaching.
1️⃣ How his system was expanded by Jé’s direct disciples.
This is twofold: An enumeration of direct disciples and How they extended the teaching.
The disciples of the omniscient Jé Tsongkhapa also abided in the morality of the three vows and seriously practiced the yogas of the three types of persons and the two stages of highest yoga tantra.
The sages who continuously sounded the great drum of the Tripiṭaka and the four classes of tantra were like a constellation of stars in the expanse of space, or a grove of trees rooted in the earth, or springtime trees adorned with flowers.
The four lamas from whom Jé received his Dharma connection were: Umapa Tsöndrü Sengé, the great preceptor Namkha Gyaltsen, Jetsün Rendawa, and the great preceptor from Dragor, Chökyap Sangpo.
The four spiritual sons from before Jé went to live a renounced life were: the guide from Tsakho, Ngawang Drakpa; Drakpa Lodrö from upper Amdo; Dongtön Jñānaśrī; and Geshé Shatön.
The eightfold retinue of later times was: the four from Ü, that is, Jampal Chösang, who was known as Lama Jamkarwa; the venerable Sangkyongwa; the venerable Rinchen Gyaltsen; and the venerable Jangsengwa; and the four from lower Amdo, in other words, Tokden Jampal Gyatso; Geshé Sherap Drak; Geshé Jampal Tashi; and Geshé Palkyongwa; these are the eight.
1️⃣ Those eight had qualities of scriptural and experiential realization beyond imagining and all were nurtured by the meditational deities.
The two known as “the two principal spiritual sons” were the omniscient Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen and the great bodhisattva, Drigung vinaya master Drakpa Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ The especially holy threefold retinue prophesied by Vajrapāṇi was said to be the two principal spiritual sons and Lama Jamkarwa.
On account of his very great kindness with respect to Jé’s teaching, the sole inner heart son was the omniscient Khedrup.
1️⃣ The four great sons whose deeds were vast as space were: Jamyang Chöjé Tashi, the unequaled Dharma lord Gungru Gyaltsen Sangpo, Jetsün Sherap Sengé, and the omniscient Gendün Drupa.
The ten lamps of the teaching from Ü and Tsang were: the Sangphu Dharma lord Könchok Tsültrim, Nyalgö Rinchen Samdrup, Khyenrap Wangchuk Drakpa Sangpo, Gyalwang Khaché of Sangphu, Nyalchen Sherap Gyaltsen, Hortön Namkha Pal, the Dharma lord Lodrö Chökyong, Baso Chökyi Gyaltsen, the Dharma lord Palden Sengé, and Narthangpa Rapchok.
The six bodhisattvas who spontaneously worked for the sake of others were: the Radreng bodhisattva Shākya Sönam, the bodhisattva Künga Sangpo, the Demo Thangpa bodhisattva Lodrö Gyaltsen, the bodhisattva Tsültrim Palsang, the bodhisattva Shönu Gyalchok, and the bodhisattva Gyaltsen Draksang.
2️⃣ The two imperial preceptors who were honored by rulers were the Jamchen Dharma lord Shākya Yeshé and Jangdarma.
1️⃣ The two nephews who studied the teachings extensively were Machik Önpo Namkha Pal and the guide from Yargyap, Sönam Nampar Gyalwa.
The two, the greater and lesser, who upheld the good qualities of the training were Tashi Gyatso of Shalu and the Shalu Dharma lord Lekpa Gyaltsen.
The two sages with extraordinary intelligence were Musepa Lodrö Rinchen Sengé and Shangshungpa Chöwang Drakpa.
The six great flags who protected the teaching in every direction were: Tö Shersang, Mé Shersang, Gugé Ngawang Drakpa, Lhopa Gyaltsen Sengé, Lama Palden Sherap, and Lama Yönten Palwa.
The two translators who spoke two languages were Gö Lotsāwa Shönu Pal or Yisang Tsewa and Taklung Lotsāwa.
The six Dharma lord rulers were the precious Palden Sangpo, the precious Sönam Sangpo, the precious Jangchup Dorjé, the precious Sönam Gyaltsen or Nyernyipa, the Drigung trulku Döndrup Gyalpo, and the Taklung trulku Tashi Pal Ö. The eight upholders of the teaching who knew many scriptures were Dromtön Sherjung Lodrö, Gyalwa Rinchen Samdrup, Drakpa Rinchen of Jamling, Sönam Rinchen of Ngari, Jamyang Rinchen Gyaltsen, Gugé Sangyé Gyaltsen, Jamyang Rinchen Drakpa, and Gyalsé Dejungwa.
The four sages of Amdo and Rong were Do Öser, Do Leksang, Do Sönam Sherap, and Rongpo Chenak.
1️⃣ The two descendants of the one who reached the ḍākinī realm were the Treshing trulku Jangchup Palwa and Rinchen Palwa.
1️⃣ The two amazing beings were Kyemchok Mönlam Thayé and Rimi Bapa Sönam Rinchen.
The eight presences were Chenga Künga Lodrö, Chenga Shönu Ö, Chenga Lodrö Gyaltsen, Chenga Palsangwa, Chenga Namkha Gyaltsen, Chenga Sönam Lhündrup, Chenga Rinchen Gyaltsen, and Chenga Rinchen Palwa.
The four great lamas who beautified the top of the throne were the Gungthang Dharma lord Dzepa Pal, Nyenpo Shākya Gyaltsen, Takphu Gushri Palden Döndrup, and Teurapa Chöjé Pal.
The four abbots who ruled the assembly were: the great Kyormo Lung abbot Chögyal Palsang, the great Phakmo Dru abbot Gyalsangwa, the great abbot Künga Dorjé, and the Chenyé abbot Jangchup Palwa.
The five greats of Tramo Monastery were: the great Drakpa Sangpo, the great Dakpo Öser Sengé, the great Lodrö Phel, the great Künga Gyaltsen, and the great Tashi Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ The two Dharma directors of initiation were the Densa Thil Dharma director, Jamyang Khaché Punyé Śrī; and the Drigung Dharma director, Tashi Rinchen.
The four masters who raised the victory banner of teaching and study were: Master Tsöndrü Drakpa, Master Lekdenpa, Master Taklep Jangchup Gyaltsen, and Master Jangchup Palwa.
1️⃣ The four experts in the ten difficult texts who propounded reasoning were: Kachupa Darma Sangpo, Baser Kachupa, Tsotsa Kachupa Yönten Gyaltsen, and Lhula Kachupa Lekpa Pal.
The ten experts in the four difficult subjects who apprehended both words and meaning were: Tilchung Kashipa Dönyö, Drakgön Kashipa Rinchen Pal, Gyalwa Kashipa Rinchen Chögyal, Gyeré Kashipa Sangyé Wangchuk, Takphu Kashipa Sangyé Sangpo, Yakdé Kashipa Sönam Sangpo, Drö Kashipa, Tsurphu Kashipa, Kashipa Chöseng, and Kashipa Drakpa Gyaltsen.
The four nobles who upheld discipline were Joden Dawa Lodrö, Joden Sönam Lhündrup, Joden Lekrinpa, and Kongpo Joden.
The six venerables whose morality was pure were: the venerable Chösangpa, the venerable Gyaldingpa Döndrup Pal, the venerable Gyamawa Gendün Gyalpo, the venerable Öser Tashi, the venerable Shönu Sangyé, and the venerable Künga Bum.
The five realizers who had renounced this life were: Kuchor Tokden Sangyé Palsang, Tokden Namkha Shoré, the Götruk Dharma lord Drakpa Jungné, Tokden Ralshikpa, and Bulewa Namkha Gyaltsen.
In addition, there were Lhasik Drakpa Gyatso, Gyatön Losang Drakpa, Drung Shönu Palwa, Khenpo Samgyalwa, Lama Serthupa, the Yarding trulku Shilo Pönpo, Drung Namkhawa, Lama Gönpo Jangchup, Lama Sörin, Drung Chöphakpa, Lama Shaka Rinpa, Lama Dawa Sangpo, Lama Chö Gyaltsen, and Gyara Sangyé Yeshé.
Of those, except for the four masters of teaching and study, I wrote the names according to Panchen Sönam Drakpa’s Beautiful Ornament of Thought.
1️⃣ Also, not appearing in that text are: Dülzin Lodrö Bepa, Phakö Yönten Gyatso, the great Narthang preceptor Sönam Chokdrup, the great Sülphu preceptor Könchok Palsang, Gyalwa Drakpa Tashi, Lama Künsang Rinchen, Lama Söwang, Jamyang Dorin, the Gyama trulku Künga Lodrö, the Dharma lord Gyaltsen Draksang, Jatang Rinchen Sangpo, and Tsangpa Losangpa.
1️⃣ Still, after examining various biographies and Dharma histories in detail, I felt that those not included should be inserted here.
If one takes into account the mere possession of a Dharma connection, then it is also appropriate that Rongtön Shākya Gyaltsen and Ngorpa Chöjé Künga Sangpo be counted.
In Sangsing Neringpa, or Chimé Rapgyé’s, biography of Jé, the Golden Shrine, the way of listing direct disciples is unlike that above; I have not written of it for fear of including too much.
In brief, there does not seem to have been a Dharma master from the trio of Sangphu, Dewachen, and Gungthang monasteries; the trio of Gawa Dong, Kyormo Lung, and Sül Chölung; the trio of Loro, Jayül, and Rinchen Gang; the trio of Gyal, Langthang, and Drö; the trio of Radreng, Cheka, and Kyilbu; the trio of Drigung, Taklung, and Tsalpa; the trio of Ei Teura, Nyal Drakor, and Takten Phüntsok Ling; nor a Dharma master from such Yor-side monasteries as Thangpoché and others who did not bow down before Jé Rinpoché.
1️⃣ All those mentioned above were included by virtue of their greatness in scripture and realization, their family lineage, or their high status.
There also were those who extensively received the Dharma connection of an inferior or middling being and those who attained a mere Dharma connection; there were so many of these each year that they cannot be enumerated.
2️⃣ If one makes a list based on benefactors, there were Neudong Gongma Chenpo, Shika Neuzongpa, Shika Drakarwa, Gyama Tripön, Yarlung Jowo, Ölga Dzongpön, Dzingchi Drakpa Rinpoché, Gompa Chögyal, Tölung Wön Yönten Gyatso, Rinpungpa Namkha Gyaltsen, and others.
1️⃣ All the nobles of Ü and Tsang raised Jé’s feet to their heads.
They made offerings of wealth and homage.
And even the great emperor Yunglo, who wielded worldly sovereignty, invited Jé to his kingdom, offering many of his own possessions and expressing praise for him with golden scriptures.
Although in this Land of Snows many have opened the way for their own philosophical systems and made them self-sufficient, the coming to the Land of Snows of Jetsün Tsongkhapa the great is comparable to how our original teacher, the fully enlightened Buddha, came into this world sphere.
1️⃣ It is explained in the Scholars’ Banquet Dharma History that when Jé was very small, the Fourth Karmapa, Rölpai Dorjé, gave him the layman’s vows and told him, “If you go to Ü and Tsang, you will perform deeds for the Muni’s teaching that equal those of the Muni himself.”
And when Jé went to Tsāri, at the bottom of Mola Pass, Jetsün Maitreya told Jé himself, “Noble son, know that your coming will be like the coming of the Buddha into the world”; and so it came to pass.
1️⃣ And, as the great and glorious Yisang Tsewa stated, “At present, it is as if this great land is being shielded by the white umbrella of Jetsün Tsongkhapa.”
1️⃣ This expression of praise is exactly right.
How his disciple sons expanded the teaching By virtue of achieving the power of prayers that uphold the holy Dharma, all Jé’s direct disciples had their own respective qualities of greatness and ways of serving the teaching, which are beyond imagining, so how can one like me express all of that?
1️⃣ This will mainly be an explanation of how just a few of the disciples expanded Jé’s tradition.
Tokden Jampal Gyatso, Gyaltsap Jé, Dülzinpa, Khedrup Jé, Jamyang Chöjé, Jamchen Chöjé, Jé Sherap Sengé, and the great scholar Gendün Drup are the ones who, through both teaching and practice, made Jé’s tradition of sutra and mantra widespread in Ü and Tsang.
1️⃣ The duo of Sherap Sengé and Gungru Gyaltsen Sangpo were the main disseminators of the teaching in the outlying areas.
Abbots of Ganden Gyaltsap Jé and Khedrup Jé Of those, the duo of the omniscient Gyaltsap and the lion of speech Khedrup sat successively on the Dharma throne of Jé Lama at Ganden and firmly established the Geden teaching.
1️⃣ Just before Jé attained nirvana, he gave Gyaltsap Rinpoché his robe and scholar’s hat, making it understood that Gyaltsap Jé was to preside over the monastic seat.
Accordingly, all the disciple sons, such as Dülzinpa, the venerable Rinchen Gyaltsen, and others, prayed to Gyaltsap Jé with a single voice and consecrated him on the fearless lion’s throne.
Khedrup Jé expressed his praise of Gyaltsap Jé in the Glorious Good Qualities, and the great scholar Gendün Drup praised him poetically in the Marvelous Wheel of Utter Goodness.
1️⃣ Like the great lord Jé Tsongkhapa, Gyaltsap Jé purely pursued the teaching and study of the vinaya, the practice of the three bases, and so forth.
1️⃣ Taking those as a basis, and with his own inner experience and stainless scripture and reasoning, for thirteen years he gave explanations of, on the sutra side, the higher and lower abhidharmas, valid cognition, the perfection of wisdom, Madhyamaka, and so forth; and, on the mantra side, secret mantra in general and, in particular, the explanations of the tantras of Guhyasamāja, Cakrasaṃvara, Kālacakra, Hevajra, and Vajrabhairava, the guidelines on the two stages, and so forth.
1️⃣ In short, he transmitted the countless excellent explanations of Jé Lama, which were not within the purview of earlier Tibetans.
1️⃣ Most of Jé’s direct disciples and countless other fortunate and intelligent beings were utterly captivated, and they respected and honored Gyaltsap Jé without distinguishing him from Jé Rinpoché.
1️⃣ Thus the son followed his spiritual father and firmly established Jé’s tradition of teaching and practice.
After Gyaltsap Jé, the omniscient Khedrup presided over the monastic seat and, like him, maintained the tradition without degeneration.
1️⃣ In particular, he taught even the most subtle of Jé’s teachings without mixing them with other teachings.
1️⃣ Not only did he destroy by reason countless thinkers who wrote critiques of the works of Jé, but he refuted the Dharma lord Gungruwa and others who, through listening to statements made by the great lord himself but failing to analyze the view fully, explained Jé’s version of emptiness as an affirming negation.
1️⃣ Moreover, he also refuted all those whose way of explaining how to maintain certainty about the view did not go along with Jé’s claims.
1️⃣ Therefore, because Khedrup Jé freed Jé Lama’s unique tradition of sutra and mantra from stains, his kindness toward this teaching is matchless and unrivaled.
1️⃣ He thought that the essence of the Buddha’s teaching was found only in the teaching of Jé Lama and that the main thing for him to do was to establish it firmly in Ü. It seems that because he assumed that responsibility, he did not even accept invitations from Ngari and Kham urgently requesting he visit between Dharma sessions.
1️⃣ There was, for instance, the letter sent to Geshé Shersang: The great burden of the complete teaching, Which is the matchless teaching tradition of the holy father Jé, Is so heavy it weighs on my heart, Yet I do not feel at all exhausted.
1️⃣ Previously, even when it came To establishing the lamp of stainless teaching In dark hinterlands far from the sun Of the Muni’s teaching, I did not become discouraged.
Nevertheless, the Land of Snows is the base of the teaching, The place where many superior beings established it, The source of all present-day holy Dharma, Renowned as the pure land of Ü and Tsang.
1️⃣ If you examine well, however, the teaching is only a facade; It, too, is like a lamp whose oil has been depleted.
1️⃣ All the cherished treasures of the Muni are being tossed away like grass, And debased minds and distorted textual systems are increasing by the day.
1️⃣ The messenger demons of behaving however one likes, Those appearing as spiritual teachers honored by the multitude, And the many massed troops who strive mightily to throw down The victory banner of the teaching, those three cover every corner of this land.
1️⃣ It has come to that, and those with the eye of intelligence, Those undiscouraged in distinguishing Dharma from non-Dharma, Those great spiritual teachers who bear the burden of the teaching are very rare, And so their followers are also extremely rare.
1️⃣ Finding this situation almost unbearable, I zealously take on responsibility for the teaching.
1️⃣ I’ve been strongly moved by intelligence to uphold right here The perfect tradition of holy father Jé.
When the wish-granting tree of the teaching is being cut right here At its root with the ax of non-Dharma and faulty explanation, I see that for a branch to grow elsewhere just once And just a little would have little value.
Right now, right here, the massed army of non-Dharma is the enemy, And I am holding the weapon of the well-explained teaching.
1️⃣ Therefore, if I abandon the struggle right here, Who, pray tell, will maintain the Muni’s cherished treasures?
1️⃣ Therefore, though your lofty intent is virtuous, I cannot consent to your proposal, However much you may wish it.
Such was the reply that Khedrup wrote.
1️⃣ He feared that the continuum of Jé Lama’s unique explanatory tradition would be cut, so although he could be punished by the ḍākas and ḍākinīs for widely propagating teachings on the difficult points in secret mantra, which are like the heart blood of the ḍākinīs, he nevertheless, without regard for body or life, and deeply concerned solely for the teaching, elucidated these by way of teaching and writing.
In Biography of Khedrup Jé, Jamyang Chöjé says: If you explain mantra, it seems, you incur the suffering of having your heart blood taken by the ḍākinīs: when Khön Könchok Gyalpo taught the Hevajra to seventeen people, Drokmi Shākya Yeshé sent a man to ask, “Is your life indestructible?”
1️⃣ thereby rebuking him. Renouncing this life, Khedrup Rinpoché taught the exposition of mantra.
This roaring lion lived on the snow mountain of the tradition of father Jé.
When he roared his roar of scripture and reasoning on the secret heights, all the foxes who propounded misconceptions were terrified and intimidated, while the herd of deer who upheld the teaching thrived under his protection. Khedrup Jé governed the monastic seat for eight years.
1️⃣ More may be learned about both Gyaltsap Jé and the omniscient Khedrup from other detailed biographies.
Other Ganden abbots After Khedrup Jé, the mighty wonder worker from Shalu, Lekpa Gyaltsen, occupied the golden throne, and then Jé Lodrö Chökyong.
2️⃣ The latter was an expert in the four classes of tantra in general and the Kālacakra in particular, so he wrote a supplement to Khedrup Jé’s Great Commentary on the Kālacakra.
1️⃣ Next was Khedrup Jé’s younger brother Baso Chökyi Gyaltsen.
1️⃣ Through studying with Tokden Jampal Gyatso, he became an expert in the teachings of Jé’s ear-whispered lineage.
1️⃣ He wrote Guidelines on the View, a text on the generation and completion stages of Kālacakra, and other texts.
1️⃣ Next was Jé Lodrö Tenpa.
1️⃣ He founded Dakpo monastic college and thereby began to make Jé’s tradition of teaching and practice widespread in that area.
He wrote many excellent expositions, including the Great Commentary on the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras, the Commentary on the Other Four Dharmas of Maitreya, the Arrangement of the Path According to the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition, and other texts.
Next to sit on the golden throne was Jé Mönlam Palwa.
1️⃣ Those up through him are known as the sevenfold Mañjughoṣa lineage from Tsang.
1️⃣ Although Mönlam Palwa never met Jé Tsongkhapa in person, he did meet him directly in a dream and received the Dharma from him, so he is included in the enumeration of direct disciples. He was believed to be the rebirth of Atiśa’s disciple Khutön Tsöndrü Yungdrung.
1️⃣ He wrote the Great Commentary on the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition, whose use has been widespread up to the present day.
There was a line of succession of abbots at the monastic seat at Jangtsé, such as Gyaltsap Rinpoché’s follower, Hortön Namkha Palwa, and at the monastic seat at Shartsé, such as Sharpa Rinchen Gyaltsen, Wön Dadrak, and others.
Jangtsé monastic college and Nyakrong monastic college: When Khedrup Rinpoché occupied the Ganden throne, he selected four masters from the study centers and gave them courses of study; afterward, the study centers were combined into two.
In Jangtsé, there were Nyenpo Chökyi Wangchuk, Nyaltön Paljor Lhündrup, and others, and in Nyakrong, there were the all-encompassing Dharma lord Tsema Wangyal, the Dharma lord Gyalwangpa, and others.
1️⃣ They kept the lineage of lamas unbroken and developed the tradition of Jé Lama without any degeneration.
1️⃣ Drepung abbots The great lord Jé said to Jamyang Chöjé Tashi Palden, “You should found a fine monastery; from the mother monastery, joy will become greatly widespread among the offspring.”
And, as Jé himself gave Jamyang Chöjé the Dharma conch that had been taken as a treasure from Gokpa Mountain, Neupön Rinsang became the benefactor, and the great monastery of Drepung was founded.
1️⃣ Jé Rinpoché told Jamyang Chöjé, “Explain a hundred volumes from memory,” so the latter memorized all the words and meanings of the 108 volumes of mantra and definition-vehicle texts and explained them.
He gave courses of study continuously on the stainless explanatory system of the tradition of Jé Lama regarding Madhyamaka, valid cognition, the perfection of wisdom, and so forth, so that the disciples produced by the teachings, such as Musepa Lodrö Rinchen, were as numerous as constellations in the sky.
Each of seven selected Dharma-expounding masters individually gave courses of study, and because of that there came to be seven monastic colleges: Gomang, Losal Ling, Deyangpa, Shakor, Thösam Ling or Gyalwa, Dülwa, and the tantric college.
1️⃣ Later, they merged into four: Gomang, Losal Ling, Deyangpa, and the tantric college.
1️⃣ After Jamyang Chöjé came Palden Sengé.
1️⃣ The great adept Śavaripa appeared before him in a vision and gave him direct instruction, and so forth, on the glorious protector, Mahākāla.
Next came Rinchen Jangchup, Jé Ön Losang Nyima, Rongtön Losang Drakpa, Nyenpo Shākya Gyaltsen, Jé Mönlam Palwa, and Jamyang Lekpa Chöjor.
1️⃣ The latter had a vision of Mañjughoṣa, who said to him, "What joy when there is someone of your intelligence!"
1️⃣ so the name he was given was Jamyang [= Mañjughoṣa] Gawai Lodrö, "Whose Intelligence Inspires Joy."
1️⃣ He was an unrivaled scholar-adept beyond compare.
He gave explanations of the great texts for many years and had many disciples, including the omniscient Second Dalai Lama, Gendün Gyatso, and others.
Jamyang wrote many excellent expositions, such as his textual commentaries on the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras, Ornament of Higher Realization, Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way, Entering the Middle Way, the epistemological tradition, and so forth.
1️⃣ He wrote the Meteor Wheel in response to Gorampa and annihilated his debased claims.
1️⃣ After Jamyang Gawai Lodrö, Yönten Gyatso came to the abbot's throne, and after him the omniscient Gendün Gyatso and Panchen Sönam Drakpa.
The latter performed many great deeds: he occupied the golden throne of Ganden and was the preceptor of the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso.
1️⃣ Also, his writings on Dharma include textbooks on vinaya, abhidharma, Madhyamaka, the perfection of wisdom, and the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition; nowadays, these are the main course texts for study at Losal Ling.
Moreover, he wrote many expositions of mantra, for instance on the generation and completion stages of Guhyasamāja; the Dharma history called the Beautiful Ornament of Thought; and An Almanac of the Teaching.
After that came the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso; the Fourth Dalai Lama, Yönten Gyatso; the omniscient First Panchen, Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen; and the mighty conqueror, the Great Fifth Dalai Lama; thenceforth, each successive Dalai Lama occupied the abbot’s throne of Drepung.
Were I to write on the line of lamas of each individual monastic college, it would become excessive, so I will discuss just some of the main ones.
1️⃣ At Losal Ling, as already mentioned, there was the pair of Jamyang Lekpa Chöjor and Panchen Sönam Drakpa; at Deyang, there was Drachung Yönten Gyaltsen; at Shakor there was Narthangpa Rapchok; at Thösam Ling there was Nyenpo Shākya Gyaltsen; those were the especially illustrious ones.
At Gomang, there were Rinchen Jangchup, Jampa Lhündrup, Shukhangpa Gelek Lhündrup, Gungru Sangyé Tashi, and in particular, Gungru Chökyi Jungné, whose textbooks and courses of study were better than others.
2️⃣ This great scholar-adept, who was the equal of the Indian ornaments who beautified Jambudvīpa, wrote textbooks on all of sutra and mantra and, in particular, on the exegesis of the five root texts.
1️⃣ These became treasures of unprecedented excellent explanation, so that nowadays the textbooks of Jamyang Shepa are the only Dharma texts upheld at Gomang.
1️⃣ Indeed, not just those at Gomang, but countless philosophers in both central Tibet and the outlying areas made them the foundation of their study and reflection, and because of that, it seems, most of the other textbooks were put away.
1️⃣ Sera abbots Jamchen Chöjé Shākya Yeshepa went to China and became the guru of both the emperor Yunglo and his son, Sönté Gyalpo; and he began to spread the tradition of Jé Lama in the land of China.
He returned to Tibet and, as ordered by the great lord Jé, founded Sera Thekchen Ling.
When he again went to China, he selected Kachupa Dargyé Sangpo for the abbot’s throne.
After that, Gungru Gyaltsen Sangpo, known as the incomparable Dharma lord, sat on the throne.
Some of the latter’s explanations of the view and other topics did not accord with the teachings of Jé Rinpoché, so Khedrup Jé said, “Gyensangwa, when you teach by saying ‘moreover,’ you serve up explanations that do not accord with Jé’s; I rebuke you.”
1️⃣ Gyensangwa was upset, and sadly said: Losang Drakpa has gone to abide in Tuṣita, Jamchen Chöjé is celebrated in the emperor’s palace, And Gungru Gyaltsen Sangpo is abandoned on the snow mountain.
The Biography of Tsültrim Rinchen of Shalu states: When Tsülrinpa went to hear the Dharma from Jamyang Chöjé Tashi Palden, the omens were unfavorable, so he went to Sera to hear the Dharma from the incomparable Dharma lord, Gyaltsen Sangpo.
His way of explaining the view did not agree with the way Jé’s direct disciples explained it, and when asked the reason for this, Gyensangwa said, “They did not know what to say to others; Jé Lama told me that the proper way to meditate on emptiness is as an affirming negation.”
1️⃣ In Gungruwa's guidelines on view, the way it is explained is like that, so perhaps Jé taught Gungruwa before having completed his analysis of the view.
Gungruwa wrote a multitude of treatises that were appreciated by other scholars, such as commentaries on the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras and Ornament of Higher Realization, and the three Doses of Madhyamaka Emptiness texts — extensive, middling, and abbreviated. He also had many disciples because of his teachings, such as Khedrup Palden Sengé, Rinchen Jangchup, and others.
After Gyensangwa, Shalu Rapjampa occupied the abbot's throne, and after him Lodrö Rinchen Sengé, known as the all-knowing one.
The latter wrote extraordinary textbooks on Madhyamaka and other topics, though a few of his explanations did not accord with Jé's thought; later, Sera Jetsünpa and others wrote refutations of them.
1️⃣ Nowadays, even those who proudly depict themselves as geshés merely skim the textbooks of Gyensangwa and the all-knowing one, looking for what is unsuitable.
But when the intelligent examine them, the texts appear as treasures of excellent explanation pleasing to the wise.
1️⃣ After Lodrö Rinchen Sengé, Netenpa, Lhepu Chöjé, and Nyaltön Paljor Lhündrup sat on the monastic seat.
1️⃣ The last was a great scholar: when he debated the great Sakya scholar Shākya Chokden, he rendered Shakchok speechless.
He also defeated Tsenyak in debate, so his fame as a scholar became widespread.
He wrote a commentary on the difficult points in Tsongkhapa's Essence of Excellent Explanation: A Treatise Distinguishing Provisional and Definitive.
1️⃣ After him, the erudite Palden Lodrö; Jamyang Dönyö Palden; the Second Dalai Lama, Gendün Gyatso; and Jetsünpa Chökyi Gyaltsen sat on the throne.
1️⃣ The last was an unrivaled lord of knowledge beyond compare.
He wrote many textbooks on Madhyamaka and other topics that were treasures of excellent explanation. He responded to refutations of Jé’s teachings by both Gorampa and Shākya Chokden and wrote a treatise that corrected mistakes in the perfection of wisdom textbook by the Eighth Karmapa Mikyö Dorjé, which he offered to the Karmapa. The latter was very pleased and wrote an expression of praise to Jetsünpa.
He gave courses of study for many years on the stainless tradition of Jé, and he had many disciples as a result of those teachings.
After Jetsünpa, the abbot’s throne was occupied by Panchen Sönam Drakpa; Chödrak Sangpo; the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso; Tongkhor Yönten Gyatso; the Fourth Dalai Lama, Yönten Gyatso; the First Panchen, Losang Chögyen; and the mighty conqueror, the Great Fifth Dalai Lama.
1️⃣ From then on, successive Dalai Lamas were made the master throne holders.
Although at first there were five monastic colleges, they later merged into two, Sera Jé and Sera Mé.
The first, Sera Jé: When Musepa Lodrö Rinchen Sengé, a disciple of Jamyang Chöjé, was staying in Drepung, he was disturbed that some monks were involved in dubious practices, so he went to Sera and was followed by about a hundred disciples who were themselves sages; those who came with him settled there permanently, and it became known as Sera Jepa monastic college.
1️⃣ Sera Mé: Through courses of study given by Jangchup Öser, known as the all-knowing Jangchup Bumpa, there was a steady increase in disciples.
1️⃣ Later on, a tantric college was established, too.
1️⃣ Those who were in the line of abbots or were scholar-adepts at Sera Jé and Sera Mé are countless, so I will not write about all of them here.
Thus, both Sera and Drepung were established on the basis of the monastic seat at Ganden Mountain, and from them — like sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons — grew many centers of teaching and practice, and the tradition of Jé Lama pervaded the whole of Tibet, both central and outlying areas.
Although there are prophecies of such developments in the Precious Book and other texts, from fear of excess I did not write about them.
1️⃣ Tashi Lhünpo abbots The omniscient Gendün Drupa Pal Sangpo made Jé’s teaching widespread in the Tsang region.
1️⃣ Drepung was founded eight years after Ganden, Sera was founded eleven years after Ganden, and twenty-nine years after that, Jé Gendün Drupa founded the monastery of Tashi Lhünpo as prophesied by the lama/meditational deity.
1️⃣ Although he was earnestly requested to ascend the Ganden throne after Shalupa Lekpa Gyaltsen, he did not, saying, “In war, it is necessary to establish a foothold in enemy territory; it is my hope that this place will come to be just like Ganden.”
Apparently, he said that because at that time there were many in the vicinity of Tashi Lhünpo Monastery who had mistaken views about Jé’s tradition, such as Ngorpa Künga Sangpo, Gorampa, and Shākya Chokden.
1️⃣ Later, because of the steady increase of the brilliance of Tashi Lhünpo, Sakya monasteries such as Ngor, Tanak Thupten, and Serdokchen became as dim as fireflies in sunlight.
For thirty-eight years, Jé Gendün Drupa gave courses of study primarily at the monastic seat at Tashi Lhünpo and went forth to teach the Dharma in many areas south, north, west, and east of the Tsangpo River.
1️⃣ He thought only of the teaching: he gave courses of study on the great texts and wrote many treatises, such as the Commentary on Vinaya, the Hundred Thousand Stories, the Short Commentary on the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition, the Ornament of Reasoning, and others.
1️⃣ He had innumerable disciples who were scholar-adepts: in the early period, his disciples included Künkhyap Mönlam Palwa, the duo of Dülkar and Dülnak, Jatang Sempa Chenpo, Panchen Sangpo Tashi, Shangtön Drimé Shenyen, Gyüpa Jinpa Palwa, and others; in the middle period, they included Panchen Lungrik Gyatso, Jé Drakpa Samdrup, Topden Öser, Chöjor Palsang, and others; in the later period, they included Nenyingpa Künga Delek, Jé Ön Losang Nyima, Panchen Yeshé Tsemo, and others.
1️⃣ After Gendün Drupa, the monastic seat at Tashi Lhünpo was occupied by Panchen Sangpo Tashi, Panchen Lungrik Gyatso, and Panchen Yeshé Tsemo.
1️⃣ At this time, the Second Dalai Lama, Gendün Gyatso, was staying at Tashi Lhünpo.
1️⃣ Panchen Yeshé Tsemo appeared to be jealous of him, so he did not remain at Tashi Lhünpo but went to Drepung.
Then, Gendün Gyatso established Chökhor Gyal Monastery, and at a time when his activities were very successful there, he went at the urging of Panchen Yeshé Tsemo and presided over the monastic seat of Tashi Lhünpo.
After him came Ngari Lhatsün Tenpai Nyima, Panchen Shantipa Lodrö Gyaltsen, Panchen Dönyö Gyatso, and Shangtön Lodrö Leksang, who wrote textbooks that gave excellent expositions.
1️⃣ Subsequent abbots were Nenying Chöjé Chökyi Gyaltsen, Shangtön Chöpal Gyatso, Chukshungpa Sönam Gyaltsen, Shangtön Samdrup Palsang, Nyangtön Damchö Yarphel, Nyangtön Lhawang Lodrö, and the omniscient Panchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen, from whom the lineage of Panchen Lamas originates.
Three monastic colleges formed at Tashi Lhünpo. It would be too much for me to write about all of the lineage lamas in them, so I will not elaborate much.
At Shartsé, the first main instructor was Shangtön Drimé Shenyen, and the sixth was Lodrö Gyatso.
1️⃣ At Kyilkhang, the eighth main instructor was Panchen Shantipa Lodrö Gyaltsen, and the tenth Tenpa Darsang.
1️⃣ At Thösam Ling, the first main instructor was the all-knowing Chöjor Palsang, and the fourth was Trukjampa Tashi.
1️⃣ All these wrote textbooks that gave excellent explanations of Madhyamaka, the perfection of wisdom, and the other main subjects. Even though the First Dalai Lama, Gendün Drupa, set his mind on establishing a tantric college, he did not succeed.
1️⃣ The omniscient Panchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen did establish a tantric college, though, and some authoritative masters, such as the great mantra practitioner Dorjé Dzinpa Könchok Gyaltsen, came from there.
Accordingly, based on these four great monasteries of Ü-Tsang, new Geluk monasteries and practice centers increased manyfold, and a multitude of monasteries of the other philosophical systems were converted to Geluk centers.
1️⃣ Through the efforts of the upholders of the tradition of Jé Lama, the Geluk came to pervade the Land of Snows, both in the central and outlying areas. For details, the Dharma histories should be consulted.
1️⃣ Geluk centers in the far west and east.
1️⃣ The spread of Jé’s teaching in the regions of upper Tibet, that is, Ngari, and lower Tibet, that is, Amdo and Kham, was initially due to the kindness of the two Shersangs.
1️⃣ In the far west Jé’s direct disciple, Tö Sherap Sangpo, founded the monastery of Takmo in the Śītā River basin in the Mangyül region of Ngari, and Wönpo Sherapa of that center founded the monastery of Triksé, and both prospered greatly.
The Dharma system of Jé also was established at the monastery in Zangskar.
Moreover, Gugé Ngawang Drakpa became the lama of the three brothers — Gugé Dakpo Tashi Ödé, Tri Namgyal Ö, and Shākya Ö — and he established and extended Jé’s superlative system in many older monasteries, such as the temple of Toding Ser — the monastic seat of the great translator Rinchen Sangpo — the monastery of Tsaram, and Lötang.
Khedrup Jé’s disciple Sangphuwa Lhawang Lodrö revived the temple of Pethup, which had been built by Ödé, the younger brother of Lha Lama Jangchup Ö; and he founded both the Barkya monastery and the Liging monastery.
Thenceforth, new monasteries were built in many areas, and most of the old ones came to uphold the Geluk philosophical system, so that the Geluk came to cover the entire Ngari area.
1️⃣ In Kham The first to spread Jé’s teaching in Amdo and Kham was Mé Sherap Sangpo.
When the Dharma lord Dargyé Sangpo was staying at the monastic seat of Jamchen Chöjé, that is, Sera Thekchen Ling, the bodhisattva from Mé, Sherap Sangpo, was a visiting teacher, and by offering explanations that accorded with the tradition of the father Jé and his spiritual sons, he attracted an ocean of scholars.
1️⃣ At that time, he wondered, "If I go in the direction of my own birthplace, Kham, and - retaining this attire of pure vinaya morality - modify the Dharma lineage and the view and conduct there, will the benefits to the teaching of Jé Rinpoché and to sentient beings be very extensive?"
1️⃣ When this occurred to him, the all-knowing Jangchup Bumpa knew it through his clairvoyance, and he invited the bodhisattva to visit.
1️⃣ He gave him good, devoted service and, bestowing on him a woolen blanket and a hat, said without further ado, "You should leave quickly for Kham and do whatever benefits the teaching in the Kham region."
1️⃣ Sherap Sangpo thought, "He told me, without any discussion, 'Leave quickly for Kham.'
1️⃣ Would it then be proper to remain here?
1️⃣ In any case, I'll ask Gyaltsap Rinpoché, for he might tell me to stay here for now."
1️⃣ He then went to Ganden, and when he asked Gyaltsap Rinpoché where he should reside, the latter reportedly said, "Don't even think about delaying; it is much better you go to Kham.
2️⃣ At a place there in the vicinity of the famed Riwo, students will come and great deeds will be performed."
1️⃣ Gyaltsap gave him a prophecy and parting gifts.
1️⃣ Later, Sherap Sangpo founded Chamdo Monastery.
1️⃣ He built a school of dialectics, attracting about three thousand monks.
2️⃣ The aims of beings were served extensively in middle Kham and lower Amdo, so the clairvoyance of the all-knowing Jangchup Bumpa was confirmed.
1️⃣ Then Gyalwa Phakpa Lha was born as the son of the direct disciple of Jé Rinpoché, Kuchor Tokdenpa or the yogin Öpak Dorjé, and successive emanations followed.
1️⃣ The incarnation lineages of Phakpa Lha’s disciples Shiwa Sangpo, Chakra Trulku, and Gyara Trulku, and the revered Tatsak Jé emanations of Baso Chökyi Gyaltsen, followed, as did the incarnation lineage of Jé’s direct disciple, Gushri Palden Döndrup; the Takphu trulkus; the reincarnations of Ngok Lotsāwa Loden Sherap and Ngok Lotsāwa Lekpai Sherap — that is, the greater and lesser households of the Drakyap trulku; and others.
2️⃣ In short, many great reincarnates held the rosary of incarnate lines.
Moreover, there were many beings — scholars and adepts — who built monasteries in different areas and propagated the teachings on explanation and practice; those known as the six from Gang, the nine from Rong, the ten from Shö, and the three from Ru spread the Geluk teaching in all parts of Kham.
1️⃣ In Amdo In the region of Domé, that is, Amdo, the Dharma lord Döndrup Rinchen founded a monastery at Jakhyung Drak.
In the birthplace of the conqueror Tsongkhapa, where the Kumbum stupa stands, there were some monks who were mingling with townspeople.
1️⃣ So when the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso, arrived there, the vinaya Dharma lord Öser Gyatso built Tsangön Monastery at his suggestion.
After the passing of some generations of lamas, courses of dialectical study and a tantric college were started there, and later a medical college was built.
1️⃣ The mighty Fourth Dalai Lama, Yönten Gyatso, sent Gyalwai Sepo Dönyö Chökyi Gyatso to start a monastery in Domé.
2️⃣ Gyalsé Rinpoché founded Gönlung Jampa Ling, and started courses of study, so that it became the first school of dialectics in the area.
Later, Jé Jamyang Shepa started a tantric college.
From this monastery emerged many great beings who benefited the teaching.
1️⃣ In particular, the successive sages Changkya Ngawang Losang Chöden, Jé Thukenpa Ngawang Chökyi Gyatso, and the omniscient Rölpai Dorjé served as objects of veneration for the Mañjughoṣa of the East, the great emperor of China, and worked to sustain the teachings of Ganden Mountain.
The tenth abbot of Gönlung, Lama Tsenpowa Döndrup Gyatso, founded a great monastery in Serkhok, Ganden Damchö Ling.
1️⃣ It was developed by the former abbot of Gomang, Hor Ngawang Trinlé Lhündrup, and became prosperous.
1️⃣ Its four monastic colleges were presided over by the successive incarnations of Mindröl Nomin Han: a pair of dialectics colleges — upper and lower — a tantric college, and a medical college.
1️⃣ Losang Tenpai Gyaltsen, who was known as Rongbo Chöjé Rinpoché (seventeenth century), had a cousin named Kalden Gyatso who was known as Kachu Rinpoché.
1️⃣ The latter gave himself over entirely to essential practices comparable to those described in the biography of Jetsün Milarepa and gained the elevated status of adept.
1️⃣ He founded the hermitage of Tashi Khyil at the practice site of his lama and instituted the course of study at the great monastery of Rongbo.
1️⃣ Later, he founded colleges for Kālacakra and tantra that still flourish today.
Kalden Gyatso had many disciples, so eighteen practice centers, and others besides, were founded.
1️⃣ At present, these have expanded into many more centers.
1️⃣ Yershong Ngakrampa Jamyang Lodrö was a main disciple of the great tantric yogin Könchok Yarphel, Changkya Dorjé Chang, and Jé Jamyang Shepa.
1️⃣ He was proficient in the meanings of the scriptures in general and the tantras in particular, and he built the monastic college at Yershong.
He gave many initiations, guidelines, and instructions, both at the monastic seat and in areas above and below it.
1️⃣ From him came a multitude of excellent disciple lineages, such as that of Tongkhorwa Sönam Gyatso, and reincarnation lineages as well. The crown ornament of the millions of scholar-adepts, Jé Jamyang Shepai Dorjé, founded the great monastery of Tashi Khyil in the southern part of Domé.
The great scholar Ngawang Tashi developed the center well, and wrote many textbooks.
1️⃣ Jamyang Shepa Lama himself returned as a protector of the teaching and of beings as the Dharma king Mañjughoṣa, Könchok Jikmé Wangpo.
1️⃣ He presided over Tashi Khyil for a long time in a dual role, until there were four subdivisions: Thösam Ling, the tantric college, the Kālacakra college, and the medical college.
Nowadays, of all the study centers of Domé, Tashi Khyil is manifestly the best, like the crown of a victory banner. It also has a great many branch monasteries that are study centers and retreat centers.
The Dharma lord Rinchen Lhünpo, who was born into the lineage of rulers of Choné, founded Choné Monastery.
Later, the one known as Drakpa Shedrup, the author of many Dharma texts, started the courses of study and the tantric college there.
1️⃣ Print blocks of the Kangyur and Tengyur are housed at Choné, and there are also many branch monasteries.
Thus, in the same way as limbs and their extensions grow from the body, study and retreat centers spread from those great monasteries to many places, so that every place in Domé, south and north, was filled with them.
Although in earlier times there were in the Amdo region some who upheld the Sakya and Kagyü Dharma lineages, it has now become solely the province of upholders of the Geden tradition.
Having briefly explained how Jé’s tradition of teaching and practice spread in both the central and outlying areas, I will now explain briefly how, in particular, Jé Lama’s secret-mantra teaching spread.
Sherap Sengé From among Jé’s disciples, who came forth like the sky covering the earth, those who practiced secret mantra and those who gave explanations to others were countless, but those who had the special oral tradition of Guhyasamāja became the source of the teachings of secret mantra.
One lama, the scholar-adept Sherap Sengé, experienced the profound view, mastered the stable concentrations of the generation and completion stages, was blessed by his meditational deity, and accomplished deeds with the help of the Dharma protectors.
He was strengthened by his prayer that he enhance the work of Jé.
He held every one of Jé’s special instructions on Guhyasamāja and Cakrasaṃvara, and it is said that he also possessed many unwritten special instructions and oral directions that were not given to other disciples.
How the teachings of secret mantra were propagated after being entrusted to Jamchen Chöjé by Jé Lama: After Jé Rinpoché suggested to Jamchen Chöjé that he start a tantric college, Jé went above Sera and, before many, many great scholars who were his disciples, gave one Dharma session each, right from the beginning, on the root tantras of both Guhyasamāja and Cakrasaṃvara.
1️⃣ Then he held up in his hand a book that included four Guhyasamāja commentaries and asked, “Who is able to master this?”
Even though he said this three times, no one was able to reply.
Then, Jé Sherap Sengé stood up amid that ocean of scholars and replied, “I’ll do it!” Having ritually recited this three times, he accepted the book.
1️⃣ Although it is written in the Dharma History of the Drukpa scholar Pema Karpo that Khedrup Jé derided him, there is no evidence for this in any other Dharma history or biography.
1️⃣ Pema Karpo's Dharma History also says, "When the duo of Rongtön Shākya Gyaltsen and Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen debated at Sangphu, the victory drum was beaten by Rongtön" and "Although the Gedenpas say that Gyaltsap and Khedrup were the heirs of Jé Rinpoché, it appears from our investigations that Gendün Drup was the real heir."
1️⃣ Those and other statements appearing in certain writings are sheer fantasy because they are hearsay with no source; this is just an aside.
Then, the great lord Jé prophesied to Sherap Sengé: You need not be afraid; I will entrust you to Dharmarāja.
You will go to Tsang, and on top of a mountain shaped like a downward-facing bell, there will be a yogin practicing Yamāntaka; he will make your teaching flourish.
1️⃣ Atop a mountain shaped like a supine demoness will be a demoness; she also will make your teaching flourish.
1️⃣ Then you yourself will know what is to come.
1️⃣ Then the two of them, the father Sherap Sengé and his spiritual son Gendün Drup, went to Tsang.
The vinaya master Lodrö Bepa received many Dharma teachings on sutra and mantra from both father and son.
Many disciples who were scholar-adepts gathered to receive teachings on secret mantra from Sherseng and on the definition vehicle from Gendün Drup.
1️⃣ The vinaya master acted as an assistant teacher, and the courses of study were very successful.
Khedrup Norsang Gyatso said: In the days of my youth, in Rikhu, I saw the Dharma lord Sherap Sengé, the omniscient Dharma lord Gendün Drup, and the Dharma lord and vinaya master Lodrö Bepa staying together with their great spiritual sons; it was like when the Teacher, the Buddha, lived on earth with his retinue.
Thus, once while staying in Tsang enhancing the course of study, Sherap Sengé suddenly remembered the promise to propagate the tantras that he had made previously to Jé, so in order to give a course of study on Guhyasamāja, he went to Lhünpo Tsé.
The lama of that monastery, Phakö Yönten Gyatso, along with his retinue, requested and received Dharma teachings.
1️⃣ Phakö Yönten Gyatso wrote a tantric commentary called Ascertainment of the Illuminating Lamp and maintained well the Geluk way of explaining the tantras; he was also the Yamāntaka yogin prophesied by Jé.
1️⃣ At that monastery, Sherap Sengé instituted the mandala practice ritual according to Jé Rinpoché’s system as well as courses of study on the tantras.
Thinking it a good omen, Jé Rinpoché had left there a Dharmarāja mask, along with a stick and noose, taken from his treasury. Apparently, they can be found there even now.
1️⃣ Then Sherap Sengé went to Sengé Tsé.
1️⃣ He took the female master of that place as his benefactress and instituted the mandala ritual and tantric course of study at the monastery as it had been before.
This female master was the demoness prophesied by Jé Tsongkhapa.
During his stay at Sengé Tsé, in accordance with the remaining part of the earlier prophecy, namely, the statement that “then you yourself will know what is to come,” Sherap Sengé decided on his own to go and advise Dülnakpa to establish the Sé tantra tradition.
One day, when Jé Gendün Drup was sitting at the head of the right-hand tea-drinking row before Sherap Sengé, with Dülkarwa and others behind, and Dülnakpa Palden Sangpo was sitting at the head of the left-hand row, Jé Sherseng asked Dülnakpa, "Which is your year?" "
1️⃣ The horse," he replied. "
That is good," said Sherseng. "
1️⃣ There is an exemplary proverb that says, 'At the place where the yak dies, the horses will frolic,' so you should go to the region of Yakshi and give courses on the tantras."
1️⃣ Having said this, Sherseng gave Dülnakpa Jé's pandit hat and robe.
1️⃣ Dülnakpa said, "This is more suitable for Jé Gendün Drupa.
1️⃣ Please give me Jé Tsongkhapa's Four-Part Commentary on Guhyasamāja along with the book carrier and begging bowl."
1️⃣ He took them and went to the upper part of the Sé region, which is also called the region of Yakshi.
He founded a tantric college at Ganden castle in Sé, which became the tantric college of upper Tsang.
1️⃣ Although twenty-one monastic successors came between Dülnakpa and Gyüchen Könchok Yarphel, the members of the lineage with uninterrupted Dharma transmissions were: Dülnakpa, Jamyang Gendün Phel, Dorjé Chang Tashi Phakpa, Panchen Samdrup Gyatso, Gyüchen Tsöndrü Phakpa, Khedrup Dorjé Sangpo, Gyüchen Sangyé Gyatso, and Gyüchen Könchok Gyatso; these great tantric yogins who preceded Gyüchen Könchok Yarphel appear to be the only ones who gained high realizations of the generation and completion stages.
1️⃣ The principal tantric expositions that they gave were on Jé's Four-Part Commentary and his larger and smaller commentaries on Guhyasamāja and also Dülnakpa's Arrangement of the Vajra Path.
1️⃣ They expounded these and also gave expositions on what were known as the eight great guidelines.
1️⃣ The stages of the four yogas of Vajrabhairava and the six yogas of Kālacakra were among them.
2️⃣ Of those, the Great Wheel Vajrapāṇi and the guidelines on transference were omitted at some point.
The six other great guidelines were expounded, so the two sets later came to be known as the six great guidelines of the Sé tantra system and the eight great guidelines of the Mé tantra system.
There are those known as the three instructions, that is, the guidelines on the sixty-three, the guidelines on the miraculous wheel, and the guidelines on the Ocean of Yogic Achievement Related to Fire Offerings.
1️⃣ There are the guidelines on great torma of the protector.
There are guidelines on the four great reversals, related to Sitātapatrā and others.
1️⃣ Moreover, there are in this lineage many special instructions on the principal mantras on the generation and completion stages of the trio of Guhyasamāja, Cakrasaṃvara, and Vajrabhairava, as well as a multitude of very profound sutra and mantra teachings, such as guidelines on the stages of the path to enlightenment.
Although Gyüchen Könchok Yarphel had some earlier disciples of his own who studied the Sé tantra tradition, none emerged to uphold the Dharma lineage.
Later in Gyüchen’s life, Megen Lama Ngawang Lodrö and Shalu Khenchen Jamyang Tenzin venerated him, but they did not hear the great key points of the initiations and explanations of Guhyasamāja and other tantras.
1️⃣ When Gyüchen was eighty years old, the all-knowing Jamyang Shepai Dorjé and, when he was eighty-one, Changkya Dorjé Chang Ngawang Losang Chöden and Thangsakpa Ngödrup Gyatso came from Ü to venerate him, and he gave them the initiation of Guhyasamāja, an explanation of the tantra, and a vase filled to the brim with the teachings of the Sé tantra tradition, which are primarily the guidelines on the two stages.
1️⃣ Not long afterward, Gyüchen himself went to final peace; I think he had waited until he could pass on his Dharma to the rightful owners and remained in the world accordingly.
Having also received the complete teachings on sutra and mantra that came from the Mé tantra tradition and the Ensa lineage, those three holy beings combined all three streams together into a single river of teachings.
Both Jé Ngawang Chöden and Jamyang Shepai Dorjé also wrote many textbooks, and Thangsakpa also wrote about the generation and completion stages of Vajrabhairava and other topics.
1️⃣ After that, the great adept Jamyang Dewai Dorjé, Gurmönpa Dönyö Khedrup, Jé Phurbu Chokpa Chenpo, Trichen Ngawang Chokden, the Seventh Dalai Lama Kalsang Gyatso, the omniscient Changkya Rölpai Dorjé, and others made the tantras widespread in every corner of Tibet, from the central to the outlying areas.
Having founded the Sé tantra tradition, the scholar-adept Sherap Sengé returned to Ü and started the Gyümé tradition, giving courses of study on the king of tantras, Guhyasamāja.
Through disseminating expositions of Guhyasamāja, the eight great guidelines, and other topics, he made Jé Lama’s secret mantra teachings widespread.
After Sherap Sengé, Gyüpa Jinpa Palwa occupied the throne and gave courses and wrote tantric commentaries.
1️⃣ After him came many generations of lamas who were certified upholders of the lineage.
1️⃣ They wrote many guidebooks and other texts; of those, the Guhyasamāja Generation and Completion Stage of Dakpo Namkha Drak was especially popular.
1️⃣ Nenyingpa Künga Döndrup, who had met Jé Sherap Sengé only briefly, arrived at Gyümé and received special instructions on the tantras and their commentaries from Gyüpa Jinpa Palwa.
1️⃣ After Jinpa Palwa, Draksangpa occupied the throne; the two of them, Jinpa Palwa and Draksangpa, passed away in the earlier and later parts of the same year.
Although Künga Döndrup was qualified to be the tantric course master, Treu Tashi Gyaltsenpa was selected by the lead chanter Dönyö and others as teacher; appearing somewhat displeased, Künga Döndrup took religious items — a painting of a protector and a skull cup — and went to the upper part of Ü. At the outset, master and disciples together made six; then, when there came to be thirty-two, it was a good omen, since that is equal to the number of deities in the Guhyasamāja mandala.
1️⃣ Even though the lineage successors of Tashi Gyaltsenpa invited Künga Döndrup back to Gyümé to be the master, he did not come. With the tantric explanation tradition established in upper Ü, the assembly of monks grew larger each year.
1️⃣ The great tantric yogin himself developed the center for thirteen years, so it became the Gyütö monastic college of Ü. Of the line of lamas who came subsequently, there were some who performed extensive deeds: Panchen Sönam Drakpa, Gomdé Namkha Gyaltsen, Jé Könchok Chöphel, and others.
1️⃣ It was Jé Sherseng who laid the foundation of the great school of dialectics at Tashi Lhünpo.
1️⃣ He started courses of study of the tantras in Tsang and Ü that, right up to the present day, have not degenerated.
1️⃣ This being so, the Dharma lord Yisang Tsewa praised him, saying, "Of the disciples of Jé Tsongkhapa, there is none whose deeds were greater than Sherap Sengé of Narthang."
1️⃣ This is exactly right.
1️⃣ Sherseng wrote such texts as the Commentary on the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition, Guidelines on the View, and Explication of the Guhyasamāja Root Tantra.
Also, his direct disciples include many renowned scholar-adepts, such as the omniscient Gendün Drup, Phaköpa, Gyüpa Jinpa Pal, Jé Mönlam Palwa, the duo of Dülkar and Dülnak, and others.
Moreover, Jé Panchen Sangpo Tashi explained many tantras and their commentaries, the elder Döndrup Pal established the explanatory tradition of Candrakīrti's Bright Lamp in Lhodrak, and the Dharma lord Dagyenpa gave courses of study on the tantras at Nyiding and Dzingchi.
Later, monastic colleges started by the followers of the traditions of Gyütö and Gyümé multiplied in Amdo and Kham, and the exposition and study of Guhyasamāja according to Jé Lama's explanatory tradition spread in all directions.
The Ensa ear-whispered lineage As to how the Ensa oral lineage came about: At Geden Mountain monastery there were prophecies regarding requests made by Tokden Jampal Gyatso and five or six fortunate disciples to the holy lord Mañjughoṣa and to Jé Lama himself.
Although the omniscient Khedrup grasped some of the rough sense of what was known as the emanated book of extraordinary instructions of the ear-whispered lineage that had been taught by the holy lord Mañjughoṣa and Jé Lama himself, the full and complete teachings, along with the emanated, were not given to anyone but Lama Tokden Jampal Gyatso.
1️⃣ Later, the great pandit Baso Chökyi Gyaltsen received the teachings that had belonged to Khedrup Jé and, in particular, received the full and complete teachings that had belonged to Tokden Jampal Gyatso himself.
1️⃣ The great pandit Baso Chökyi Gyaltsen said: I only taught this to three qualified persons, and those three, if they should encounter a couple of qualified disciples who have renounced the activities of this life, should explain the instruction to them; they should not even mention this topic to anyone else.
1️⃣ He made this very strict commitment, which was witnessed by the meditational deity, ḍākas and ḍākinīs, and Dharma protectors.
1️⃣ Those three disciples were those known as the three Dorjé brothers.
1️⃣ The three were: the great adept Chökyi Dorjé, Palden Dorjé of Tölung, and Rinchen Dorjé of Kham.
1️⃣ The latter apparently had his name written as “Dorjé Pal.”
In the history by the Great Fifth Dalai Lama called the Vajra Life-Tree of Long-Life Initiations, it is stated that the great adept Chökyi Dorjé lived in the lotus cave on Jomo Lha Mountain, in the area of upper Nyang; Palden Dorjé of Tölung lived in Drip in a divine mansion of massive rocks that looked like piled-up vajras; and Khampa Yeshé Rinchen Dorjé lived in a solitary place in upper Jokpo in Phenyül; they had immortal vajra bodies not visible to ordinary beings.
1️⃣ There are also explanations to the effect that Palden Dorjé lived in Gephel, a hermitage above Drepung.
1️⃣ In the Fifth Dalai Lama’s biography of the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso, it says: In the private room called Sunlight, the Dalai Lama received initiation into the Cakrasaṃvara of Lūipa’s tradition from the great adept called Palden Dorjé, who had attained the rainbow body, and the great adept offered a long-life initiation to the Dalai Lama that he himself had received directly from Master Padmasambhava.
1️⃣ Of the great adept Chökyi Dorjé, it is said: The one who came from the divine path of the pure clear light, Who possesses the immortal vajra rainbow body, Who guides beings by displaying himself as they wish: To the feet of Chökyi Dorjé I make supplication.
Since, according to that statement, he obtained the immortal vajra body, it is reputed that he is still living.
1️⃣ That great adept gave the conqueror Ensapa Losang Döndrup the ear-whispered lineage along with the emanated book.
1️⃣ Although on the surface many years elapsed between the great adept Chökyi Dorjé and the conqueror Ensapa, Chökyi Dorjé stayed in the rainbow body and was met by the conqueror Losang Döndrup in pure visions; because of that, some prattlers deny the secret qualities of those great āryas.
1️⃣ Jé Ensapa Losang Döndrup gave the ear-whispered lineage to the scholar-adept Sangyé Yeshé, and he in turn gave it to the omniscient First Panchen, Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen.
The first two holy ones and, especially, the omniscient Panchen set down in writing some of the teachings of the ear-whispered lineage.
1️⃣ Thus, Jé Lama’s multitude of essential instructions on sutra and mantra, which were the principal contents of the ear-whispered lineage and the emanated book, and which came down through the lineage to father Ensapa and his spiritual son mainly from Tokdenpa and also from Khedrup Jé, were known as the Ensa ear-whispered lineage.
1️⃣ How subsequent disciples served Jé’s teaching.
How subsequent disciples served Jé’s teaching: Of the myriad supreme beings who upheld the Geden tradition in later times, the two who, like the sun and the moon, are without rival or compare are the mighty conquerors, the father and son — the Panchen and Dalai Lamas.
2️⃣ The Panchen Lamas.
1️⃣ Of those, Panchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen was believed to be of a single mental continuum with Master Padmasambhava, the noble lord Atiśa, and the matchless Gampopa.
1️⃣ His prior incarnations included: the śrāvaka Subhuti, who was the supreme interlocutor before the mighty Muni — the Buddha — and the clan chief Mañjuśrīkīrti, who compiled the Kālacakra Root Tantra in Shambhala.
1️⃣ In the Holy Land of India, it included Master Abhayākaragupta, who composed the Garland Trilogy and spread the teachings of secret mantra.
In Tibet, it included: the great translator Gö Lotsāwa Khukpa Lhetsé of Tanak, who illuminated the excellent path of Guhyasamāja; Jamyang Sakya Pandita Künga Gyaltsen; Yungtön Dorjé Pal, the scholar-adept of Nyingma secret mantra; Khedrup Rinpoché, the sole heart son of the great lord Jé; the great scholar-adept Sönam Chokkyi Langpo; and the conqueror Ensapa Losang Döndrup, who gained the supreme achievement in this very life.
In his life as Panchen Chökyi Gyaltsen, he was lord of the full and complete teaching of the Muni and was expert, in particular, in the explanatory and practical teachings of Jé Lama.
In general, Panchen Chökyi Gyaltsen’s ordinary and exalted lifestories are beyond imagining; in particular, his deeds on behalf of upholding and enhancing the tradition of Jé Lama were as vast as space.
His next rebirth was as the Second Panchen, Losang Yeshé, then as the Third Panchen, the great Vajradhara, the mighty Losang Palden Yeshé.
1️⃣ His supreme precious emanation body, the Fourth Panchen Lama Losang Tenpai Nyima, presently serves as the glorious holy protector of the teaching and of beings.
The omniscient mighty Dalai Lamas: Although according to the genealogy of his highness the Great Fifth, there are a great many in the rebirth line, the most renowned are: in the Holy Land of India, Prince Ratnadāsa; and in Tibet, Ārya Avalokiteśvara, who showed the aspect of a nobleman as the Dharma king Songtsen Gampo; the grandfather of the Kadam, Dromtön Gyalwai Jungné; the lord of the ocean of tantric texts, Sachen Künga Nyingpo; and the supreme spiritual son of Jé Lama, the First Dalai Lama, the omniscient Gendün Drupa.
The latter wrote: From now until I attain the essence of enlightenment, I pray I will always be diligent, Jé, in upholding your teaching.
1️⃣ In accordance with the prayer that had been made, each successive reincarnation extended Jé Lama’s tradition: the Second Dalai Lama, Gendün Gyatso, became the head of all scholar-adepts, performing greatly extensive deeds for the teaching; the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso, made the light of Dharma pervade the area of darkness in the wild borderlands; the Fourth Dalai Lama, Yönten Gyatso, annihilated those who sought to overturn Jé’s teaching; and the mighty conqueror, the Great Fifth Dalai Lama, made the white umbrella of the unification of religious and secular deeds cover the earth.
1️⃣ The next incarnation, the Sixth Dalai Lama, Tsangyang Gyatso, did not complete his activities due to the small merit of his students.
1️⃣ The next, the omniscient Seventh Dalai Lama, Losang Kalsang Gyatso, identified with the lifestory of the First Dalai Lama, Gendün Drup: he became the great glorious protector of all the teachings and upholders of the teaching of Geden Mountain, and he also wrote many texts explaining well the difficult points of the teachings.
1️⃣ Now, the omniscient Eighth Dalai Lama, Losang Jampal Gyatso, lives and assumes responsibility as guardian and protector of all beings, including the gods.
1️⃣ Summary of the deeds of Tsongkhapa’s followers From Jé Lama’s arrival in the world right up to the present, upholders of the teaching who combined the three qualities of learning, discipline, and goodness rival in number the dust motes in the whole world, so I cannot discuss how each and every one served the teaching; here is just a general synopsis.
Some of those supreme and holy beings assured that the continuum of explanation was preserved through exposition and teaching to collected assemblies of the wise in the great monastic centers, according to Jé Lama’s clarifications of the textual systems of the six ornaments and two supremes who beautified Jambudvīpa.
1️⃣ Some served the teaching through disseminating expositions according to the eightfold special instruction: the textual guidelines and direct instructions — along with the oral advice — on the stages of the path to enlightenment, which collect the key points of the entire teaching for practice in a single session.
Some assured that Jé’s tantric teaching was preserved and increased through expounding the stainless explanatory tradition of the great tantric systems — of which the main two are the king of tantras, the glorious Guhyasamāja, as well as Cakrasaṃvara — and through imparting the streams of initiations, guidelines, special instructions, and so forth.
Some freed the teaching of stains through refuting by scripture and reasoning those from other schools who created systems opposed to that of the texts of Jé, and by refuting those from even our own Geluk school whose debased statements did not capture Jé’s intent.
Some, for the sake of students of future generations, exerted themselves in the methods for assuring the preservation of the teaching until the end of time through appropriate writings that explained well how those of lesser intelligence could easily realize the meaning of Jé Lama’s excellent explanations.
1️⃣ Some assured the preservation and increase of the teachings of Jé Lama’s practice lineage through pure practice of the excellent paths of the sutra and mantra traditions of Jé Lama that were unsullied by the stains of the eight worldly dharmas, and through upholding them in their own minds and disseminating them to others.
Some, too, thinking that the teaching depended on the various classes of sangha, extended the teaching through protecting existing study and practice centers and establishing new ones.
Some influenced the great kings of various countries and made them devoted to the Dharma, and for those beings in the wild borderlands with no prior faith in the Dharma, they skillfully spread the teaching by making it directly meaningful.
Also, some yogins freed the precious teaching of hindrances by employing the special conduct explained in the tantras to annihilate those who did not allow themselves to be subdued peacefully but who malevolently sought to overturn the tradition of Jé Lama.
1️⃣ There were also some holy great beings who by themselves accomplished all the liberating activities just explained. If I discussed in detail how they did all that, I fear it would be far too much, so I have not elaborated.
1️⃣ Those who wish to know the details may learn them from Dharma histories and the biographies of each holy being; it is right to make them objects of faith, rejoicing, and aspiration.
Giving just a general synopsis of the ordinary biographies of those holy Geden scholar-adepts If I give just a general synopsis of the ordinary biographies of those holy Geden scholar-adepts, it is as stated by my omniscient lama: One who studies and reflects impartially, For whom all textual systems arise as instruction, One who propounds the rational path that deserves to be heard: That one is called a scholar.
1️⃣ One who stabs through the delusions, Who is able to tame their own and others’ minds, One confident that view and meditation are free from error: That one is called an adept.
The adept not overwhelmed by scholarship, And the scholar not overwhelmed by practice: One who accomplishes benefit for the teaching Is also called a holy being.
Since the foundation of all good qualities is morality, their first main praxis was guarding the purity of their vows.
Then, they severed superimposition through study and reflection on the key points, not merely of partial or minor textual systems, but the entirety of the sutra and mantra vehicles.
1️⃣ When meditating on the meaning of what they had studied, they did not discriminate the Muni’s word in terms of rejection or acceptance.
1️⃣ They took as their essential practice the practice of the totality of the teaching, which serves as a necessary condition for the enlightenment of a single individual, bearing without contradiction all the key points of sutra and mantra, from the most basic teachings of the Vinaya Sutra up to the highest Guhyasamāja practice.
1️⃣ In the wake of meditation, they did not have pride in lofty realizations when they had just some minor experiences of the channels, drops, and so forth; rather, they investigated whether or not their practice was an antidote to the delusions.
1️⃣ Nor, rather than traversing the stages of the path from the bottom up, did they drool over such states as transcendence and cutting through; for even if one is overflowing with inner realizations, this does not contradict conformity with disciplined outer conduct.
Nor, rather than being embarrassed about even the subtlest action and its result, did they generate the lax attitude that says of each subtle flaw, “What harm can it do?”
Nor, rather than focus on the explanations of meditation deities in authoritative tantric texts or an undiminished lineage blessed with the complete methods for achieving the supreme through sādhanas and special instructions, did they trust the mere say-so of those who lack special qualities but promise great blessings and quick results.
Nor, rather than relying on a gnosis-being Dharma protector who has the power to effect the appropriate conditions for clearing away obstacles on the path to enlightenment, did they entrust themselves to a principal guardian who is the type of worldling with just a little transient power.
By virtue of their solemn sense of full responsibility solely for the teaching and for beings, they spent their time exclusively in pursuits that benefited themselves, others, and the teaching.
1️⃣ Such is the synopsis of the biographies of the previous holy Gedenpas.
1️⃣ The Geluk Tradition: The Distinctiveness of Geluk.
1️⃣ The History of the Philosophical Systems in Tibet, Land of Snows. The histories of the different schools. The history of the Geluk philosophical system.
1️⃣ The way that excellent system is distinctive.
2️⃣ The general distinctiveness of Geluk.
Whether you designate it a teaching, a Dharma system, or a philosophical system, the quality that determines it as authoritative is as stated in the Beautiful Adornment of the Mount Meru of the Sage’s Teaching: A Clear Explanation of the Establishment of Philosophical Systems, written by my omniscient lama Changkya Rölpai Dorjé.
Whatever definitely possesses The intended meaning of the Tripiṭaka, Abiding in it well and without contradiction: That is the teaching of the great Muni.
1️⃣ In the practice of the three trainings, Whatever is oriented toward Abiding well in faultlessness: That is the Mahayana teaching.
The view that is free from extremes, Analytical meditation equal with stabilizing meditation, Conduct unopposed to the teaching and practice of sutra and mantra: That is the faultless teaching.
1️⃣ In general, for a teaching to be a teaching of the Buddha, its view, meditation, and conduct must not contradict the Tripiṭaka — the scriptural Dharma — and it must conform with internal practice of the three trainings — the realized Dharma.
In addition, for a teaching to be a Mahayana teaching, some portion of it must possess the path of the inseparable union of wisdom and method — meditation on emptiness motivated by compassion.
1️⃣ In short, a teaching is faultless if the view, meditation, and conduct are faultless, that is, concordant with achieving liberation.
If a teaching were deemed faultless merely because it cannot be contradicted by scripture or reasoning, then, impossibly, only the Prāsaṅgika would be faultless, and other philosophical systems would contain no faultless teachings, and their teachers, too, would be faulty.
1️⃣ Well then, if you ask how these qualities are fulfilled in the Geden tradition, this is the reply.
1️⃣ First, it possesses the three piṭakas and the three trainings.
1️⃣ The Sanskrit word piṭaka is rendered in Tibetan with the syllables for “groups” and “container”.
1️⃣ Piṭaka is a north Indian term for a “great liter,” which comprises ten liters of grain, and a container that accommodated a lot of grain was accordingly described as a piṭaka.
Piṭaka also refers to all the words and meanings of the scriptures, or the objects of knowledge that are to be established, from the basis — the aggregates, sense fields, and sense factors — on up to the result, the body and gnosis of the Buddha.
Thus, because the Tripiṭaka collects all groups or kinds, it is called a “group container.”
When piṭaka is defined like that, there are three piṭakas — the Sūtrapiṭaka, the Vinayapiṭaka, and the Abhidharmapiṭaka — or two piṭakas, of the Mahayana and Hinayana.
There is no scriptural Dharma not included in those.
Since all the principal topics of the Tripiṭaka are included in the three trainings, there also is no Dharma to be understood that is not included in those three.
The great majority of Tibetan philosophical system adherents have, when referring to those who have studied many scriptural collections, made “logician” and “teacher” pejorative terms.
Have abandoned study, they meditate in the hope of being freed merely by meditating on the channels, winds, and drops, or by being introduced to seeing the bare nature of mind, which are minor practices.
1️⃣ Even those who are proud of their studies are content with incomplete or minor textual systems.
1️⃣ The Ornament of Mahayana Sutras says, “Here, it is on the basis of study that proper thinking will arise,” and so forth.
2️⃣ Your mental continuum should be trained gradually through study, reflection, and meditation on the scriptures of the Tripiṭaka.
Those texts that do not conform with that presentation of practice leading to liberation and omniscience through the three trainings are deficient.
They lack the qualities definitive of a teaching that are explained in authoritative textual systems.
In the Geden tradition, you study and reflect upon the Sūtrapiṭaka, and you practice all three trainings with respect to both the higher and lower vehicles.
You study and reflect upon the Vinayapiṭaka and practice the two trainings — in morality and concentration.
You study and reflect upon the Abhidharmapiṭaka, and having generated the wisdom that unerringly knows the characteristics of all dharmas, you practice the training in wisdom and directly attain it.
1️⃣ In particular, Gedenpas focus on the Mahāyānapiṭaka, studying, reflecting, and meditating upon the teaching through the vast conduct related to the awakening mind, the bodhisattva stages, and the perfections, as well as countless forms of subtle reasoning about selflessness.
Thus, this supreme system possesses the totality of the characteristics that establish the Buddhist teaching in general and the Mahayana teaching in particular.
1️⃣ If you believe that secret mantra is deficient in the qualities thus established, here is the reply.
Secret mantra in general is said by the Tantra Based on the Questions of Subahu and by great Indian pandits to be included in the Sūtrapiṭaka. And, within the subdivisions of secret mantra, there are examples of all three piṭakas.
On the occasion when the hundred holy deities were taught, the explanation of the color, shape, appearance, and other aspects of form; the classification of footless, many-footed, four-footed, and other beings; and the teaching chiefly on the empty part of the unique gnosis of bliss and emptiness: all fit into the Abhidharmapiṭaka.
1️⃣ On the occasion when the generation and completion stages were taught, the teachings on how to achieve uncommon concentration by way of divine pride and clear appearance of oneself as the deity, fit into the Sūtrapiṭaka.
1️⃣ And the general and specific teachings on mantra vows and pledges fit into the Vinayapiṭaka. Thus, it is unnecessary to distinguish secret mantra as separate from the Tripiṭaka.
No other philosophical system in the Land of Snows is equal to the Geden, which lacks even the slightest fault with respect to view, meditation, or conduct, so the Geluk is distinctive relative to all other philosophical systems in those three ways.
How its view is distinctive a) Mistaken views Some Tibetans of earlier generations maintained that the meaning of emptiness is nothingness, and held as supreme the debased nihilistic view that asserts that virtue and vice, cause and effect, and so forth, are entirely nonexistent.
This is unacceptable.
1️⃣ The lowliest of the extremists, the Lokāyatas, were twofold: the logicians and the contemplatives. Of those, some contemplatives accepted karma and cause and effect for a span of a hundred lives, and so forth, but they did not accept liberation.
1️⃣ The logicians asserted that cause and effect and liberation were equally nonexistent. No philosopher in any other philosophical system, non-Buddhist or Buddhist, accepts a path to liberation after alleging that cause and effect are entirely nonexistent.
Some philosophers, too, say that emptiness is truly existent; and some say that extrinsic emptiness — the enlightened mind’s emptiness of any conventional dharmas extrinsic to it — is the final, ultimate nature.
1️⃣ Those, too, are unacceptable.
1️⃣ The Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way says: Those for whom emptiness is a view, It is said, are incorrigible.
Thus, Nāgārjuna taught that one cannot recover from an eternalist ultimate view; and Nāgārjuna was said by the Conqueror himself, in the Descent to Laṅka Sutra and elsewhere, to be a reliable authority on the exposition of the definitive meaning.
Some say that, if you apprehend something as merely existent, it entails apprehending a sign, so it cannot be that all dharmas are existent, nor can it be that they are nonexistent.
Therefore, they say, when meditating, you should settle on thinking nothing, about either existent self or nonexistent self, emptiness or nonemptiness, and so forth.
1️⃣ Thinking nothing is meditation on reality, and that very nonseeing is proper seeing.
1️⃣ Saying this, those people are stuck in the view and meditation of the system of Heshang.
That, too, is unacceptable.
Concepts such as existent and nonexistent, permanent and impermanent, and one and many, have been proven through the scriptural analysis and reasoning of the great Indian pandits to be contradictory in terms of mutual exclusion through direct opposition.
And since that very thought, “I will think nothing,” is thinking something, and that very nonseeing is both seeing and not seeing, this view seems only a mass of contradictions.
1️⃣ In addition, those who pretend to be contemplatives say that it is only necessary to meditate on the meaning of the ultimate nature — elaborate virtuous practices are nothing more than distractions and rational analysis is unnecessary.
They say that without any conceptual thought or analysis — with the mind not pursuing the past and not anticipating the future — you settle without fabrication or contrivance on the fresh awareness of the present, rejecting all conceptual fabrication with regard to the clear, empty, and ungrasping reality, relaxing comfortably into thinking nothing; when you do this, you come face to face with dharmakāya itself.
1️⃣ That, too, is unacceptable.
If, while absorbed in thinking nothing, a buddha gnosis for which nothing is unknown should arise in your mind, then a result would emerge from an incompatible cause; anything could arise from anything.
1️⃣ This is treated extensively in the omniscient Jé Tsongkhapa’s Essence of Excellent Explanation, his stages of the path texts, and his explanations of the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way and Entering the Middle Way; and in the Dose of Emptiness that Opens the Eyes of the Fortunate and the Guidelines on View that Clear Away the Darkness of Wrong Views written by Jé’s spiritual heir Khedrup Jé.
1️⃣ Correct view Thus, when those of earlier generations undertook analysis through reasoning that examines the ultimate, it was inferior, because they did not know how to establish the combination of thoroughly refuting the object of refutation and knowing how to determine, non-nihilistically, what is left over after refutation: cause and effect, deed and doer, and so forth.
When you follow the texts of the tradition of the glorious protector, Ārya Nāgārjuna, who was prophesied by the Conqueror himself as a commentator on the definitive meaning, you do not find, among all the dharmas of samsara and nirvana, even an atom that is ultimately existent from the side of its own basis of imputation. They are, however, established authoritatively as mere conventional labels through name and conceptual thought applied to their bases of imputation.
1️⃣ Dharmas are established as this or that dharma conventionally by reason of their emptiness of inherent nature, and when you know how to posit deed and doer, and so forth, acceptably, then even if inherent existence is refuted conventionally, it is permissible in our own Geluk system to accept that all deeds and doers involved in karma and its result, and so forth, are authoritatively established, regardless of how others see things.
1️⃣ Not only that, inducing certainty about dependently arisen dharmas gives you greater certainty about lack of inherent existence, so you know that emptiness and dependent arising are mutually supportive.
1️⃣ This profound information was obtained only by the great lord Jé, through the kindness of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa.
1️⃣ Apart from Jé, who taught it clearly, no previous Tibetan sage established this precisely and then taught it.
1️⃣ Thus, the omniscient Gyaltsap said: Until I met Jetsün Tsongkhapa, I did not even partially realize The path that severs the root of existence — The Madhyamaka, dependent arising free of extremes.
If even that great lord of reasoning, who nearly rivals the six ornaments of Jambudvīpa, said that before meeting the great lord Jé face to face, he did not even partially realize this Madhyamaka view free of extremes, then it goes without saying that it does not enter the purview of others who — pretending to be scholars — have not tasted the nectar of the great lord Jé’s excellent explanations.
1️⃣ Needless to say, earlier Tibetans did not know Jé’s wonderful Madhyamaka system either.
1️⃣ Also, with respect to the Vijñāptimātra system, no one at all had been able to explain precisely how the nature and imputed particulars of form and so forth are imputed, or how to establish the selflessness of dharmas through denial that they exist by way of their own characteristics.
1️⃣ In explaining the Cittamātra philosophical system, Khedrup Jé states: No one anywhere could teach the scriptures; he opened the precious treasury of the intended meaning of the profoundest points and thus aroused delight.
You may well ask, "Well, then, must it be said that even such previous holy beings as the father Marpa and his spiritual son Milarepa, the father Sachen Künga Nyingpo and his spiritual sons, the father Dromtön and his spiritual sons, and Butön, Ngok Lotsāwa, Rendawa, and others, did not realize the profound meaning?"
1️⃣ The reply is: Although there is no certainty regarding their followers, it cannot be said that those eminent beings did not realize the Madhyamaka view.
Nonetheless, when it came to writing great texts that established the profound Madhyamaka system through flawless scripture and reasoning, elucidating without confusion the intention of father Nāgārjuna and his spiritual sons, nothing like what the omniscient Jé wrote had previously appeared.
1️⃣ You can see this when you examine the texts of those others.
1️⃣ In Jé's own words, in the Essence of Excellent Explanation: Many who were very learned in scripture and reasoning, who had taken great pains on the path of reasoning, who were not deficient in their accumulation of the qualities of higher realization: Strive though they might, they did not gain realization, while I have seen that abiding reality quite well, through the kindness of the protector-lama Mañjughoṣa.
1️⃣ In expounding the meaning of this passage, some apparently explain that the one who is very learned in scripture and reasoning is Butön, those who had taken many pains on the path of reasoning were Sakya Pandita and Chapa Chökyi Sengé of Tsang, and those who were not deficient in their qualities of higher realization were Marpa, Milarepa, Gampopa, and others.
1️⃣ Thus, with respect to the Gedenpas, Jé himself prayed: Thoroughly rejecting all wrong and debased views that, Out of fear of the profound meaning of the ultimate nature, Hold as supreme a mind-made or partial emptiness, May I realize that all dharmas are primordially empty.
Accordingly, the explanation and practice of the excellent profound Madhyamaka view, which is the ultimate intended meaning of the Conqueror, describing an emptiness that is not just mind-made or partial, but established by refuting the object of refutation — inherent existence, with respect to all dharmas, from form to complete omniscience — is like the common property of every Gelukpa.
1️⃣ Although some in other philosophical systems have refuted the extreme of mere existence, it is not common to all in those systems, so the Geluk is distinctive in terms of view.
1️⃣ How it is distinctive in terms of meditation: a) Refuting some mistaken views The tradition of Ganden Mountain is also distinctive in terms of meditation. (
1) Some renowned in Tibet as contemplatives say that all conceptual thought is to be abandoned, so it is necessary to stop thinking. (
1️⃣ 2) Some, too, say that all conceptual thought is movement of the dharmakāya, so realizational experience will increase to the same degree that conceptual thought increases. (
3) Some, by saying “conceptual thoughts are the great ignorance that plunges you into the ocean of samsara,” say that conceptual thoughts are ignorance. (
4) Some say that conceptual thoughts are the dharmakāya. (
1️⃣ 5) Some say when the mind abides clearly and vividly without elaboration, that is buddha or nirvana, and when the mind elaborates even a little, that is sentient beings or samsara. (
6) Some say that when you are established in darkness with the body perfectly still, the eyes staring upward, and nothing present in the mind, then all the strange experiential appearances that arise, such as smoke and so forth, are the dharmakāya and the nature body, so that even ordinary beings can see the dharmakāya directly.
Some say that seeing those appearances is not seeing the totality of the dharmakāya but, rather, seeing just a part of the dharmakāya.
Some say that although those appearances are not the dharmakāya, they are path signs previewing your imminent vision of the dharmakāya.
Some say because those ephemera are mistaken appearances of a confused mind, they have no essence whatsoever.
1️⃣ Some say they are produced phenomena, while others say they are unproduced.
1️⃣ And so on: many mistaken statements are made about the nature of meditation.
1️⃣ Those claims are quite unacceptable.
The first claim is unacceptable because if all conceptual thought is to be abandoned, then even inferential reasoning that realizes emptiness must be abandoned, so emptiness could never be perceived directly, and yogic perception could never be attained.
The second is unacceptable because it would entail that our own realization is even higher than that of a complete buddha.
1️⃣ The third is unacceptable because conceptual thought is general and ignorance is particular.
The fourth is unacceptable because it is unsuitable for both the thing to be purified and the purified part to be the same, and because it would entail that all sentient beings are freed without effort.
The fifth is unacceptable because it is impossible that a buddha’s abandonments and realizations deteriorate.
The sixth is unacceptable because it is explained in all sutras and treatises that the three and four bodies are achieved through collecting merit and gnosis over three great countless eons and are the ultimate attainment.
The seventh is unacceptable because even though a subtle partless particle is asserted by the Vaibhāṣikas, no Buddhist school asserts an isolated part unrelated to a whole.
1️⃣ The eighth is unacceptable because the mere experience of the dissolution of elements has been mistaken for virtuous qualities of the higher stages and paths.
1️⃣ The rest are only accounts of fruitless exertion.
1️⃣ Not only that, when it comes to meditation, some, thinking that all meditation must only be placement meditation and, holding the practice of analysis to be faulty even when one meditates on the view and so forth, block the door that leads to the ascertainment of the ultimate nature.
1️⃣ And, when first practicing tranquil abiding, they do focus on the stabilization part, but they give up nonconceptual placement through raising and tightening the level of the mind.
1️⃣ This is because, confused by the mere wording of such passages as Saraha’s to the effect that The mind itself, so strictly bound, Is freed when released, no doubt, they say “the best relaxation is the best meditation,” and lowering the heightened awareness and releasing the well-guarded mind, they reinforce subtle sinking; confusing that with good meditation, they waste their lives in that state.
1️⃣ Definitions of abiding and insight With regard to the essential definitions of tranquil abiding and superior insight, the criteria for achieving each, the way to posit the union of tranquil abiding and superior insight, and so forth, not only are the very terms unknown to these others, but most of them do not recognize subtle sinking.
2️⃣ They conflate sinking and torpor, and they also conflate distraction and excitation.
In short, they cannot even distinguish the difference between sinking and real meditation, so there are many who have not even come close to the pure way of achieving concentration taught by the Conqueror.
When Lama Umapa Pawo Dorjé first thought to hear special instructions on meditation, there was a famous pair of teachers in Tibet at that time, Barawa Gyaltsen Palsang and Jakchen Jampa Pal; he received the instructions from Barawa Gyaltsen Palsang.
1️⃣ Later, when he asked the holy lord Mañjughoṣa, “Does the superior insight posited by Barawa fit the definition of superior insight?”
2️⃣ Mañjughoṣa said, “Not at all!”
1️⃣ This story occurs in the biography of Jé by Khedrup Jé.
1️⃣ So, if the superior insight of even those leonine realized beings does not fit the definition, what need be said about others?
The great lord Jé refuted in general the idea that meditation is only placement meditation and, in accordance with what is taught in the mighty sage Kamalaśīla’s Stages of Meditation and other texts, taught how, when analytical meditation is required, you apply analytical meditation; how, when placement meditation is required, you apply placement meditation; and how, when you must alternate analytical and placement meditation, you do that.
1️⃣ He relied upon the extensive elucidations of the prerequisites for both tranquil abiding and superior insight found in the five books of Maitreya, Asaṅga’s five treatises on the stages, Kamalaśīla’s Light of Madhyamaka and Stages of Meditation, and other texts that expound the meaning of the instructions in the sutras on how to achieve faultless concentration.
1️⃣ He also taught: the differences among meditative objects; the distinction between analytical meditation and placement meditation; the criteria for achieving the similitude of tranquil abiding and superior insight once you have meditated in possession of the nine methods for stabilizing the mind and the eight factors for abandoning obstacles; the criteria for initial fulfillment of the definitions of tranquil abiding and superior insight; the ordering of the two; the criteria for fulfilling the definition of the concentration that unites tranquil abiding and superior insight; the way experiences arise at the beginning, middle, and end of those; the special signs that occur in the body and mind; the identification of sinking and confusion and the differences between them; the identification of distraction and excitement and the differences between them; which antidotes clear them away and how; the identification of mindfulness and introspection and the differences between them; the moment and the way to rely on each of those; the way a beginner first practicing concentration, not content just with the abiding side, requires the keenness of clarity; and so forth.
1️⃣ In short, Jé correctly established the exact meaning of the texts of the great charioteers, so all aspects of his teaching are free from confusion.
Precisely because of that, at the end of the tranquil-abiding section of the Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path, he said: The stages of achieving concentration are taught well In the sutras and treatises commenting on their intended meaning, But because they are so hard to fathom, those with little discernment Do not understand them as they are; the fault is in their own minds.
1️⃣ When they spread this ignorance to others, thinking that in those excellent Texts there is no teaching for nurturing nonconceptuality, They do not search in the texts where the teaching is, And search mightily where it is not, thinking to find it there.
1️⃣ Searching like that, they will not be able even to distinguish The concentration of non-Buddhists from that of Buddhists; Needless to say, they will not properly distinguish The differences between the concentrations Of the superior vehicle and the lesser vehicle, or The vajra vehicle and the perfection vehicle.
1️⃣ Seeing this, I have explained, in words easy to understand, How to nourish concentration as it is taught in the major texts.
Friends! You who have studied the great texts for years: Do not cast away your own precious jewel And take up the trinkets of others; Know that you yourself possess a precious jewel.
1️⃣ Seeing that there are no divided meanings In the instructions of the texts you have studied, It is right to ponder the meaning of what the mighty Muni taught: “Those who have studied much will find bliss in the forest.”
Thus, those who study many texts and Contemplatives pinning their hopes on exertion alone Do not gain the understanding that well discerns Either the way of initial practice or the criteria of achievement For the path to tranquil abiding placed in nonconceptuality.
1️⃣ To know how to develop concentration, They should rely on an expert; If not, they’d do less harm If they let the Conqueror’s teaching rest a while.
1️⃣ These words of advice and instruction were compassionately offered to those satisfied by mere foolish talk about meditation.
Thus, this tradition of Geden Mountain is also proven distinctive in terms of its good qualities of higher concentration.
1️⃣ How it is distinctive in terms of conduct The Geluk also is especially distinctive in terms of conduct.
Earlier Tibetans mostly said that what is taught in the vinaya about drinking intoxicants, avoiding afternoon food, and so forth, was influenced by those devoted to the lower, lesser vehicle, while for those who know the higher vehicle and the nature of their own mind, these practices are binding nets and so are unnecessary.
1️⃣ Those who carelessly rejected the thoroughly pure conduct of the ordained were not only thoughtless, but some, purposely rejecting even such marks of a monk as the upper and lower robes and so forth, destroyed the pure vinaya training rules of the holy Dharma, so that the teaching of the Conqueror became a mere reflection.
1️⃣ In fact, most of them did not even know how to cut and measure the upper and lower robes.
As it says in the biography by Khedrup Jé called Entryway to Faith, the great lord Jé, finding such a situation unbearable because the foundation of the Buddha’s teaching is the training in higher morality, put into practice even the subtle vinaya rules — avoiding liquor and afternoon food — and among other things, preserved the rituals of giving and receiving before eating, sprinkling water before the evening drink, and not sleeping more than three nights in the house of someone not fully ordained.
Even when engaging in secret mantra, it was as taught in a tantra: Maintaining a śrāvaka’s conduct on the outside And experiencing the joy of Guhyasamāja on the inside.
In conformity with that statement, Jé maintained completely pure conduct, practicing the yoga of the two stages, and so forth, while properly observing the entire code of conduct specified in the vinaya.
1️⃣ On top of that, he protected, as he would his own eyes, the rules prescribed in the bodhisattva and tantric vinayas — his life was that pure.
Even the scholar Taktsang Lotsāwa wrote to Jé Rinpoché: Some focus on vinaya and abandon tantra; Others, inclined to mantra, reject the vinaya.
I bow down to you who know how to practice, Well and without contradiction, the Conqueror’s entire teaching.
1️⃣ And: Some emphasize the definition vehicle and use secret mantra to make a living; Others are arrogant about mantra and just give lip service to the definition vehicle.
1️⃣ I bow down to you who see there is no way to progress to full enlightenment Without all of sutra and mantra being complete.
1️⃣ Taktsang had initially issued refutations of eighteen “cartloads of contradictions” in the teaching of Jé Rinpoché, but later, seeing good qualities such as those stated above, he wrote in praise of him.
1️⃣ Thus, the omniscient Fifth Dalai Lama, Ngawang Losang Gyatso, prayed: His marvelous life was lived observing the rules of purity; His great mental strength was a giant wave of bodhisattva conduct; His yogic conduct was the two stages of supreme bliss-emptiness; May I meet with the teaching of Losang the conqueror.
1️⃣ How it is distinctive in terms of secret mantra a In terms of view The Geden system is also distinctive in terms of secret mantra.
1️⃣ Other Mahayanists on the definition vehicle, and āryas practicing the three lower tantras, are able to abandon the coarse knowledge obstacles based on the gnosis that directly realizes emptiness and on a limitless accumulation of merit.
1️⃣ Since they are unable to abandon the subtle knowledge obstacles, however, it will take them a long time to reach buddhahood.
1️⃣ In contrast, the highest yoga tantra vehicle is able to abandon every knowledge obstacle in a single, short life in this degenerate age.
1️⃣ This difference in speed is due to the subject — innately blissful awareness — that realizes the object, emptiness.
1️⃣ Since the student for whose sake highest yoga mantra is taught needs to have sharper faculties than even the sharpest perfection-vehicle student, that emptiness — which for such a disciple is a union of bliss and emptiness — must be solely the subtlest emptiness, as established by the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka.
1️⃣ For a student who is not so advanced and merely aspires to the path of mantra, there is a common bliss-emptiness, which is like the emptiness established by Svātantrika and the emptiness established by Cittamātra — that is, empty of subject and object being substantially different.
1️⃣ But the unexceptional student has no gnosis of bliss and emptiness that is applied to the emptiness of a substantially existent, self-sufficient person.
Because of that key point, Jé Lama stated in his Essence of Excellent Explanation: This pair of chariot-paths for establishing reality, that is, Cittamātra and Madhyamaka, is widely used in the perfection vehicle, and even scholars and adepts who comment on secret-mantra texts teach no third position on the meaning of reality that does not conform with those two.
Thus, you need to know the key points establishing reality in all the texts of sutra and mantra.
1️⃣ If you seek reality without relying on the twofold way of the great charioteers, you are like a blind person running through a treacherous area without a guide.
1️⃣ Thus, the emptinesses concocted by Tibetans are not even close to the Vaibhāṣika, Sautrāntika, or Vijñaptimātra views, let alone the Madhyamaka view.
2️⃣ If these are not even equal to the profound nonduality of the profound and the clear found in the lower-tantra classes, how could they ever be equal to the emptiness of the union of bliss and emptiness found in highest yoga tantra?
1️⃣ Since they are not equal, their proponents may claim to propound a system of meditation of the path of the generation and completion stages, but it is just a lifeless facsimile: it lacks the meditative path that establishes the imprints for the dharmakāya, and it separates method and wisdom.
1️⃣ So not only will it be incapable of bringing about the stage of union, but it will also be incapable of weakening the root of samsara in the slightest.
Thus, the secret-mantra path of the Gedenpa is also distinctive in terms of view.
Most others, not knowing the requirement that the fourth initiation introduce the inseparable union of the two truths, introduce only emptiness, and the emptiness merely involves doing the meditation of Heshang, which is thinking nothing whatsoever.
Some, a little better than those, say they are introducing bliss and emptiness, but their standpoint on emptiness is like that just explained, so it is bliss and emptiness in name only.
With regard to the requirement that the generation stage come first so that the mind is ripened for the completion stage, some say that the generation stage was taught by the Conqueror to students of lesser intellect just for the attainment of common yogic achievements, and that those who desire the supreme yogic achievement must meditate on the completion stage from the outset; they say that the generation stage is not a cause of buddhahood.
Also, with regard to the completion stage, some say it is meditation only on the definitive meaning, and some say it is meditation on the union of deity yoga and the definitive meaning, and that meditation on the definitive meaning means placement of the mind without thinking anything.
In short, thus, they do not assert as the cause of buddhahood anything other than Heshang’s meditation.
Some also say that the completion stage is meditating like this on the meaning of the fourth initiation: when the inner fire is kindled at the navel cakra through fixing your meditation on the short a syllable, and by the power of that meditation, the white bodhicitta at the crown cakra melts and bliss arises, then when you look intently at the nature of that bliss and an empty, clear appearance dawns, you place the mind nonconceptually on the nature of that bliss — that is the completion-stage meditation of the inseparable bliss and emptiness.
1️⃣ Also, the Hevajra Tantra says about the time of the fourth initiation: This gnosis is very subtle And is, like the center of adamantine space, Dirt-free, complete, tranquil; You yourself are also the father of that.
1️⃣ Reflecting on the meaning of this verse, some look up into space with their eyes after reciting those words, and when that space has expanded farther and farther, they think finally that the extent of space is the extent of mind — that, they say, is the nature of the fourth initiation.
1️⃣ On the basis of that scriptural passage, they take empty, clear space to be the meaning of the ultimate nature, not understanding how to relate metaphor and meaning: just as space is the negation of obstruction, so in bliss-emptiness, emptiness is the negation of the projection of true existence.
1️⃣ The meditative equipoise on empty, clear space becomes the source-concentration of infinite space of the first formless absorption, but it is nowhere near the profound completion stage taught in the tantras.
1️⃣ Some say that when the innate gnosis becomes manifest simply through your becoming accustomed to the mind’s abiding in bliss, clarity, and nonconceptuality, then you awaken in this life.
1️⃣ There is no awakening, however, without the achievement of a complete enjoyment body possessing the seven integrated factors and adorned with the major and minor marks.
1️⃣ Achieving that in this life is impossible without a cause, and the cause must be of a similar type.
In that regard, this impure body cannot be transformed into the enjoyment body, so you have to discard it.
Knowing the antidote through which you discard it and, having discarded it, the way to achieve the enjoyment body — you have to have the fortune to practice those paths.
1️⃣ If, however, you could awaken just by settling the mind in bliss, clarity, and nonconceptuality, without any basis for achieving a conqueror’s body adorned by the major and minor marks, then you would awaken in the body of an ordinary person.
1️⃣ You would be a buddha who is solely dharmakāya, without any of the major or minor marks, the enjoyment body, the emanation body, or other aspects of the form body.
1️⃣ Definitely attaining buddhahood in this very life is said to depend on whether you know how to achieve the illusory body.
The identification of the illusory body does not come across clearly in the teachings of the system of Gö Lotsāwa Khukpa Lhetsé.
Those adhering to the system of Marpa take illusory as appearances not inherently existing, and body as the divine body, and identify the illusory body as the divine body’s not inherently existing as it appears.
1️⃣ Jé Lama, on the other hand, clarified through extensive explanation how when the yogin who has established the basis for achieving the illusory body abides in isolated mind, with vajra recitation as the inner condition and union with the consort as the outer condition, the isolated mind enters the stages of death exactly as wind and mind do during the stages of dissolution of earth, water, and the other elements, and transforms into the three empties; when you rise from the clear light of the final isolated mind of the reverse order, the immediately subsequent instance of the primordial wind that is the vehicle of that clear-light mind rises as the illusory body.
1️⃣ Since even the duo of Marpa and Gö, who were top experts on Guhyasamāja, did not think of this, then needless to say, others claiming to be tantric yogins did not either.
The essential subject matter of highest yoga tantra is twofold: innate gnosis and the illusory body; since Jé Lama alone really clarified those two according to the special instructions of the tantras and great adepts, and there is no clearer explanation than his, it is proven in this way that the Geden teaching tradition is also distinctive in terms of secret mantra.
Moreover, whatever the context — from the enumeration of tantric texts, to initiations, pledges, ritual service, the stages of activity of the mandala, and so forth — the Geden is distinctive in each, but I cannot take up every topic; you should learn about them through long acquaintance with the texts of father Jé and his spiritual sons.
In terms of interpreting the tantras The cause for other Tibetans saying only mistaken things: The concealed key points of the two stages in the root tantras must be distinguished according to the intention of the great adepts who elucidated the meaning of the root texts through analyzing the explanatory tantras.
1️⃣ Some Tibetans, not understanding that, treated the tantras and the texts of the great adepts as merely academic in value.
1️⃣ Transmitting orally some essential points that they did not wish to publish, or putting them on tiny paper scrolls, they understood them as separate special hidden instructions, and when they integrated those instructions with the tantras and pure Indian texts, even if the points were contradictory, they fixated on the thought, “This is special instruction, so it is superior.”
1️⃣ For holding this, they should be criticized. Also, when you do just a little explanation and practice based on a tiny bit of special instruction and do not study or reflect upon the entirety of the Dharma, nor practice the entirety of the path, you will be satisfied with some subtle sign, such as bodily heat, where the requisites are incomplete, and develop vivid pride, arrogantly believing you have obtained definite knowledge.
1️⃣ For example, the basic Guhyasamāja Tantra says: Kill living beings.
1️⃣ Take what is not given.
Speak lying words.
Take another’s wife.
For practitioners who have not reached the level where conduct is based on nonelaboration, that passage appears to endorse many sorts of wrongful conduct; they do not see how the explanatory tantras teach the meaning of “kill” to be dissolution into the central channel of the “life,” or winds, abiding in the right and left channels; of “take” to be practice involving one’s own innate wind and mind, even if it is “not given” by other buddhas; of “lies” to be the utterance and explanation of words that show dharmas to be illusion-like; and of “taking another’s wife” to be meditation on emptiness.
1️⃣ It is taught in many tantras that this misunderstanding yields inexhaustible negative results.
Thus, Jé taught in the Great Treatise on the Stages of Mantra: Seeing the tantras and the great texts that comment on their meaning as merely academic in value and as a means for making a living through Dharma, you fixate on the thought, “An especially profound, unexplained separate instruction is concealed within them”; doing so, you show no interest in the ultimate Dharma nor develop great respect for the great mantra texts.
This prevents the great texts from appearing as instruction and is a major condition for their rapid disappearance; spurn such an approach like poison.
Rather, relying on the special instructions of the holy lama, strive in the method whereby the great texts arise as instruction.
As stated in Nāgārjuna’s Five Stages: In the glorious Guhyasamāja Tantra, These realities are concealed; Following the explanatory tantras, Try to realize them as taught by the guru.
1️⃣ Thus, in any situation related to the generation and completion stages and other aspects of tantra, even if you are dealing with straightforward texts of instruction coming from an uninterrupted lineage, do not reject any of the great texts out of partiality, and instead harmonize the root tantras, the explanatory tantras, and tantras with similar approaches, and combine those in a noncontradictory way with the authoritative texts of the great adepts that comment on those tantras.
1️⃣ Establishing unmistakenly each topic — the nature of the paths, their number and order, the system through which realization arises based on practice, the way to prevent detours and clear away obstacles, the method for enhancing practice, and the system for achieving the result — and enlisting all textual systems as instruction: this should be understood as the special, unique Dharma of this Geden philosophical system.
Further discussion Moreover, of the many teachings that other philosophical systems have taken as the essence of their Dharma, this system lacks none of them: it includes all vinaya-vow lineages, explanations, and practices from those earlier traditions known as the vinaya of upper Tibet and the vinaya of lower Tibet; the Kadam-lineage stages of the path teachings from the noble lord Atiśa; the renowned teachings on mind training; and the explanatory tradition, transmitted from father Ngok Lotsāwa and his spiritual sons, on the great texts of abhidharma, the perfection of wisdom, Madhyamaka, valid cognition, and so forth.
1️⃣ It also includes limitless profound teachings explaining the initiations and tantras related to the great mandalas of the four classes of tantra, guidelines for the generation and completion stages, and so forth, as exemplified in brief by: the Guhyasamāja lineage from Marpa, Gö Lotsāwa Khukpa Lhetsé, and others; the Kālacakra teachings transmitted from Ra Lotsāwa, Dro Lotsāwa, and Shong Lotsāwa; the Cakrasaṃvara and Hevajra teachings transmitted from father Sachen Künga Nyingpo and his spiritual sons; the Great Wheel Vajrapāṇi teachings transmitted from Lama Mar; the teachings on the Red, Black, and Vajrabhairava forms of Yamāntaka transmitted from Ra Lotsāwa, Kyo, and Shang; the essence of the Kagyü Dharma, the Mahāmudrā of bliss and emptiness; the six Dharmas of Nāropa and Niguma; and also the practices known as Chö, transformation, the taste of sameness, and so forth.
1️⃣ The Gedenpas possess all of those, as many as there are, lacking none, taking them as profound special instructions.
1️⃣ Those teachings that had, in the interval, been covered with the faults of not being understood or being wrongly understood, father Jé and his spiritual sons purified, as gold is purified by burning, cutting, and rubbing, so Geden alone is distinctive in what it offers.
1️⃣ The Geluk possesses, flawlessly and perfectly for anyone whenever they wish, instructions for practicing the four activities — peaceful, increasing, empowering, and wrathful — that occur in stainless tantras, were transmitted from those holy beings who were adepts, and are not polluted by Bön, extremism, or other debased traditions.
1️⃣ Thus, there is no situation where it is necessary to rely on another system for lack of the requisites for the four activities.
1️⃣ Moreover, the conventional sciences of grammar, logic, art, medicine, poetry, mathematics, and so forth also are widespread among the Gedenpa.
Thus, this matchless precious teaching of Ganden Mountain should be known as the great Dharma ocean that incorporates every river of the profound and extensive sutra and mantra that issue from the snowy mountain of the mighty Muni.
Now, when I explain why the Geluk philosophical system is distinctive, someone may mistakenly think, “If what you say is true, then other Tibetan philosophical systems cannot lead you to liberation and omniscience.”
2️⃣ Our response is that many problems ensue from such a misconception: explaining the Prāsaṅgika view as superior would mean the Svātantrika and lower schools had no liberating paths; explaining highest yoga tantra as the summit of all the vehicles would mean the lower tantras had no method for achieving enlightenment; and so forth.
Thus, of the various philosophical systems that arose in Tibet, the Jonang view involves the worst wrong view, being utterly irredeemable, and it is hard to admire faulty formulations like those of Taktsang Lotsāwa and Shākya Chokden.
1️⃣ Apart from these, however, there does not appear to be even a single system fit for consistent denigration, so those who desire their own welfare should see all of them as pervaded by pure appearance. That, I think, is the root of one’s own benefit.
1️⃣ d. How others trying to refute Jé Tsongkhapa’s system could not find any faults It does not seem necessary to discuss the fourth outline topic mentioned above.
1️⃣ If I were to write about it here, this section would be too bloated.
I will write about it separately in the future if the occasion arises.
1️⃣ Concluding verses All dharmas — the mass of names that dissolve into the ultimate sphere, Everything, written with the brush of analysis, that is to be known in the three times — All objects are comprehended instantly, without confusion, in his excellent mind (losang).
1️⃣ This melody of his renown (drakpa) Is raised by all the conquerors, a song of praise to the omniscient Tsongkhapa.
1️⃣ Even though the merits of countless beings can barely carve even a drop of a syllable From the deep expanse of space pervaded completely by the amassed clouds of Jé’s wisdom and love, The great nectar rain of the profound and extensive holy Dharma is yielded without effort and swirls into a single ocean; The Geden tradition is famed in this world as an ocean of precious qualities.
This ocean, because its nature is pure morality, Is free from pollution by the corpses of faults and downfalls; Pure concentration is undisturbed in its profoundest depths, So the stars of experiential realization shine, and everything easily appears.
1️⃣ The swelling series of wisdom waves Sprays the droplets of the Madhyamaka of profound meaning.
1️⃣ This teaching with nectar-like qualities Grants the glory of deathlessness to all the fortunate; But since the profound definitive meaning is obscure, And it is hard to measure the extent of scripture and reasoning so vast, This teaching frightens the mass of ignorant fools Whose potential for the Mahayana family is not ripe.
1️⃣ For the unfortunate who rest at the bottom Of the well of partiality, there is no progress.
1️⃣ The sweet renown of the upright is pervasive, Like the sound of millions of dragons thundering forth.
1️⃣ In the treasury of the precious profound meaning, The merit they possess blazes like the crown jewel of a nāga; And for the fortunate, whose discernment is as lofty as a nāga’s crest, Those millions are like mighty nāga kings cavorting in their supreme abode.
2️⃣ E ma!
1️⃣ If even the Conqueror’s children would exhaust Their intellects in trying to express as they are All the wonders of this teaching, then what’s the value When one such as I expresses just a portion of it?
Nevertheless, saying: “In all my successive lives, May I not be separated from this excellent system,” Drawn on by attachment to my own goals, I wrote this as a banquet for the ears of the wise.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation of the history of the Geden philosophical system.
1️⃣ C. The supplementary topic of the history of sutra, mantra, and the sciences.
When it comes to the supplementary topic of the history of how sutra, mantra, and the sciences — that is, vinaya, Madhyamaka, valid cognition, and study of the Thorough Exposition of Valid Cognition on the sutra side, the initiations, explanations, and special instructions of the four classes of tantras on the mantra side, and the conventional sciences — first originated and then spread in India and Tibet, were I to extensively discuss the ultimate implications of the presentation of the express meaning of each, it would be an excellent explanation pleasing to the wise, but fearing prolixity, I must content myself with merely listing them.
1️⃣ The Bön Tradition.
1️⃣ I will relate the origins of the philosophical system known as Bön, The pre-dawn messenger, The Shen system, which opened the way For the rising sun of the holy Dharma in the dark land of Tibet.
1️⃣ The history of the way of Bön.
1️⃣ I will explain the history of Bön briefly as an aside.
A Bön text says, “During this eon, it is said, as the lifespan decreases from limitless to ten years, eighteen teachers will appear, from Tsomchok Künsang to Thangma Medrön.
1️⃣ Among them, appearing at a time when the lifespan is one hundred, will be Shenrap, the teacher of present-day Bön.
The one called Shenrap Miwoché appeared in Ölmo Lungring in the land of Shangshung.
Some say that he was an emanation of the Buddha, while others say that our teacher appeared at the same time as the Buddha.
This passage occurs in the White Beryl: Intending to subdue Bön in the land of Shangshung, The Buddha manifested as Shenrap Miwo: He practiced the twelve deeds of Bön; He taught the nine-vehicle stages; He opened the divine door for the living; He blocked the tomb door for the dead; He laid out the swastika path for beings.
1️⃣ In any case, it is known that Shenrap, possessing supernormal powers, miraculous abilities, and other powers, went to many places in Tibet where he bound to oaths and subdued many worldly gods and nyen demons: the place called Önda Serkhang Tsé, which is now Ngari Monastery; Rinchen Pung Mountain; Bön Mountain, which is to the east of the Kongyül Buchu temple; and others.
1️⃣ He explained the swastika Dharma heap, which refers to the four doors, with the treasury as fifth, and so forth.
1️⃣ He had many followers: his heir, Mutso Demdruk; the Tazik sage Mutsa Trahé Sé; Trithok Bartsam; Gu Hili Parma; the Indian sage Lhadak Ngakdro; the Chinese sage Lektang Mangpa; the Throm sage Serngok Chejam; the Tibetan sage Demgyin Tsamé Gé; the Minyak sage Chetsa Gargu; the Sumpa sage Mupung Sangtang; the Shangshung sage Shir Buchen; and others.
1️⃣ They propagated the Bön Dharma in every direction and made it widespread.
History of individual Bön traditions The Bön that spread in Tibet is threefold: a. emergent Bön, b. deviant Bön, and c. transformed Bön.
1️⃣ a. Emergent Bön During the time of Tridé Tsenpo, who was sixth in the royal line stemming from Nyatri Tsenpo, a thirteen-year-old boy from a family of priests in what was called Amshö Ön, in Ü, was abducted by dré demons and carried all over central Tibet and Kham for thirteen years.
1️⃣ When he was twenty-six, he was put back among humans; since he had superhuman powers, he had knowledge of various things, and would state: “In thus and such a place, there is thus and such a god or dré demon, who does thus and such benefit or harm; make prayers and offerings to it, and when you have performed the rite of effigy offering, it will help.”
The royal chronicles do not give any explanation other than to say that the government was administered by Bönpos through twenty-six generations of kings, from Nyatri Tsenpo to Trithok Jetsen, but it is evident that the initial spread of Bön in Tibet began from the sixth ruler, Tridé Tsenpo.
However, in the Bön of that time, which was just threefold — with subjugation of dré demons and sri demons below, offerings to ancestral gods above, and home-hearth exorcisms in between — there was no terminology such as “the view of the Bön system,” and so forth, so some Dharma histories and royal chronicles explain that the spread of Bön dates from Drigum Tsenpo.
1️⃣ The tradition prior to Drigum Tsenpo is also known as blackwater causal Bön.
1️⃣ Deviant Bön: The Tibetan Bönpos did not know how to perform the knife funeral for King Drigum Tsenpo.
1️⃣ They summoned three Bönpos to the knife funeral from three places, Kashmir, Gilgit, and Shangshung.
1️⃣ One, by worshipping Gegö Garuda and the fire god, showed himself able to fly through the sky on his drum, draw out blood, cut iron with a bird’s feather, and so forth.
1️⃣ Another practiced divination through thread-reading, oracular speech, scapulamancy, and so forth, and thereby determined what was good and bad.
The other knew the particulars of funerals, such as handling the dead, controlling the knife, and so forth.
1️⃣ Until those three arrived, there was no saying that “This is the Bön view.”
From then on, a Bön view took hold.
1️⃣ It is said that the philosophical system of the extremist theists became mixed with deviant Bön.
1️⃣ Transformed Bön is threefold.
1️⃣ The first transformation: It is said that in India a blue-robed pandit buried some distorted Dharmas as treasure then revealed them himself and mixed then with Bön.
Second, the middle transformation: It is said that during the time of Trisong Detsen, it was decreed that Bönpos had to be inducted into the Dharma.
1️⃣ A Bönpo named Gyalwai Jangchup was made to listen to the Dharma by Rinchen Chok.
He did not accept it, and angered by the king’s chastisement, he cast his lot with Bön and transformed some Buddhist scriptures into Bön scriptures.
When the king heard of this, he ordered the beheading of those who transformed the scriptures of the Tathāgata.
1️⃣ Many were beheaded, so the frightened Bönpos hid their transformed texts, along with others, as treasures, and when the texts were later taken out of hiding, they claimed these were Bön treasures.
Third, the final transformation: After the Buddhist teaching was suppressed by Langdarma, at a Bön holy place in Ü called Daryül Drolak, a man from Nyangtö in Tsang named Shengur Luga transformed many Buddhist scriptures into Bön texts.
1️⃣ He called the Perfection of Wisdom in a Hundred Thousand Verses the Big Piece, the Perfection of Wisdom in Twenty-Five Thousand Verses the Little Piece, the Establishment in Perpetuity the Bön Sutra, and the Five Classes of Dhāraṇīs the Black and White Hundred Thousand Nāga Verses.
He did so by altering various Dharma terms and topics.
1️⃣ He hid the texts as treasures under a rock at Tsonga Dreuchung.
Later, he himself took them out, pretending he had discovered them.
1️⃣ After that, Khyungpo Bönshik and others transformed many texts along similar lines.
Those three transformed Böns — early, later, and middle — were called whitewater Bön and given the name resultant Bön.
The Bönpo Dharma system The Bön Dharma has a rough equivalent to the Kangyur.
Texts showing the view are: the Golden Rosary of the Precious Completion, the root text and commentary of the Razor-Wind, the Clear-Light Wheel of Instruction, and others.
Texts on meditation are: the Cycle of Nine Drops Self-Transforming the Aggregates, the Drop of Gold, the Inner Experience of Body and Mind, the White Primordial Throne Scripture of Mind, and others.
1️⃣ Texts about conduct are: A Hundred Thousand Verses for Establishing the Eight Elements, A Hundred Thousand Verses on the Systematized Meaning of Primordial Shen, A Hundred Thousand Verses on the Ten-Stage Path of the Swastika, A Hundred Thousand Verses on the Pure Vinaya Morality, A Hundred Thousand Verses on Completing the Great Collection of Extensive Virtue, as well as the Black Hundred Thousand Verses on Sickness, the Variegated Hundred Thousand Verses on Lifespan, the White Hundred Thousand Verses on Medicine, the Black Hundred Thousand Verses on Apotropaic Ritual, and others.
1️⃣ Texts about deeds are: 360 Apotropaic Methods, 84,000 Methods of Diagnosis, the Four Chanting Meditations, Eight Lamentations, 360 Funeral Methods, Eighty-One Methods of Subjugation, and others.
1️⃣ These are called the Bön of the blackwater tantras of existence.
Texts about the generation stage, completion stage, and result are: the General Heap of Bön Treasure, the collection of the nine wrathful father tantras, the Rising of the Nine Suns of Mother Tantras, the Expanse of the Great Sutra of Wrathful Tantras, and others.
2️⃣ These are called the Bön of whitewater mantra.
1️⃣ In relation to guardian deities there are practices related to the great and small Rasp of Life, the web of the Red and Black Razors, and the slow-spreading blood of the Mother Demoness, and others; practice cycles related to messenger demons, royal demons, tsen demons, mu demons, nāgas, planetary deities, Īśvara, and so forth; the cycle on the nine wheels of animals; the cycle on harmful rites; the cycle on the cry of the running wolf corpse, and so forth.
These texts contain scattered references to impermanence, karma and its result, love, compassion, and the awakening mind, the six perfections, and so forth; and also presentations of the five paths, the ten stages, the three bodies, and so forth.
There also are equivalents to Buddhist discussions of initiation, the generation stage, the completion stage, pledges and vows, consecration, burnt offerings, practices and offerings related to mandalas, death rites, and so forth, and also many minor activities.
1️⃣ Their mode of explanation may conform with the Dharma or disagree, as the case may be.
1️⃣ They use such terms as primordial shen for the Buddha, Bön body for the dharmakāya, Satri Esang for the great wisdom mother, Samantabhadra for the enjoyment body, purifier of becoming for the emanation body, son of a shen for arhat, swastika being for bodhisattva, divine guide for lama, amenyi for emptiness, and for the ten stages, the stage of stainless crystal, the stage of the cloud mass of a tantric master emitting light rays, the stage of the transformed seal, and so forth.
1️⃣ So it seems that in many cases, their symbols and terms were imitations.
1️⃣ The Bön standpoint on view, meditation, and other aspects of the path is twofold: outsider Bön and insider Bön.
Some Bön texts say, among other things: Primordially, there was empty nonexistence; Then, primordial existents barely came to be; Then just a whitish hoarfrost came to be; And then just dripping dew drops came to be.
1️⃣ Drigung Jikten Gönpo states: Ultimately, there appears to be a system in which the world and its inhabitants arose from an egg, and a system in which they were made by fate, Īśvara, and so forth; they were deviant, extremist views.
1️⃣ Nowadays, many phrases like those above also appear in texts on healing rituals that are common everywhere.
1️⃣ Chenga Lodrö Gyaltsen taught: It says in the Bön text called the Precious Collection Tantra: Conventionally, entities exist because of clinging.
1️⃣ They do not exist ultimately, when attachment has been abandoned.
1️⃣ Both perspectives are just partial perspectives of the mind, and when mind is without attachment and without movement, that is called the gnosis of emptiness.
3️⃣ When that gnosis is nonconceptual, all-pervasive, clear, and vivid, it is itself the object of meditation.
When you conduct yourself thus in uniting both view and meditation, you will definitely attain the fruit of liberation in this birth.
1️⃣ Their way of explaining this and other statements is similar to the explanations and meanings found in Buddhist scriptures and treatises.
1️⃣ Apparently, too, the all-knowing Sherap Ö and Taktsang Lotsāwa also taught that the nine vehicles of Bön are similar to those of the Dzokchen of Nyingma.
1️⃣ I saw the following in a Bön text: The basic, naturally pure ultimate nature: In the past, prior to either buddhas or sentient beings, there existed the clear-light, empty Bön body, whose essence is naturally pure, unclothed by predispositions or obstacles; it is nothing at all, yet it is luminous.
Primordially abiding in the nature of buddha, it is not accomplished through causal activities, and is independent of productive conditions; it is effortless, spontaneous, and self-existent.
It does not improve with realization, nor worsen with nonrealization, and because it exists in buddha and sentient beings, there is no better or worse in either of them.
1️⃣ All-pervasive, thoroughly diffused, it is the basic ultimate nature.
From it, all things in samsara and nirvana spontaneously occur, and all dharmas abide in its nature.
1️⃣ Its creativity operates ceaselessly.
When it is realized, it appears as gnosis; when it is not realized, it appears as karma and the delusions.
When, its meaning ascertained, it becomes manifest, it is the realization of the ultimate nature of the abiding basis.
When you realize it, it appears on its own in your mind.
After it arises, you attain the manifest result, the three bodies.
2️⃣ The essence of that ultimate nature, unobstructed, shines plainly and vividly, knowledge appearing as gnosis: plain, uncovered by conceptual thought, analysis, movement, or effort.
At that time, the blankness of nonrecollection, the movement without fixed reference, plain nonconceptuality, wakeful nonapprehension: that is called the self-arisen gnosis of awareness, and plainly viewing that is called the view.
1️⃣ Meditation In the center of the divine palace of the precious essential mind, abiding on the eight petals of the veins, are the five elemental essences.
1️⃣ In the center of that are the five gnoses, like a ball of rolled-up colored threads.
In the center of that is a sphere of light, which is the Bön body.
That has an empty nature, so it does not go to the extreme of permanence, and it is cognitive and clear, so it does not go to the extreme of annihilation.
1️⃣ There is nothing to be taken as a meditative object in any way.
1️⃣ The Bön body’s creativity, sound, and clear light unimpededly appear as the three doors, the six types of sensory equipment, and the six types of object.
When, with view and viewer nondual, the nature of that is plainly viewed, and you place your mind on that limpid appearance without movement or separation from it, that is called meditation.
1️⃣ When you divide it, it is threefold: sessional meditation, natural meditation, and expanse meditation. Sessional meditation: Having identified the Bön body and determined the number of recitations and the number of sessions, you meditate.
At first, you abide on the object a little; in the middle, you abide and do not abide in equal measure; at the end, you enter entirely into concentration.
Thus, if you settle on the object, it stays; if you release it, it goes; if you hold it, it is held; if it arrives when needed, you have fulfilled the criteria of sessional meditation.
1️⃣ Natural meditation: Once you have the experience of the self-liberation of appearances, there is no collection or separation in your concentration, so when you abide on the object meditationless and unmoving, you have fulfilled the criteria of natural meditation.
1️⃣ Expanse meditation: When you meditate on that awareness in that way, the goal is manifest: you transcend meditated and meditator, apprehend things as if they were of the nature of space, and transcend conceptual thought and intellect.
1️⃣ At that time, all the delusions appear as gnosis, and all appearances are realized as the pure sphere of Bön.
1️⃣ After samsara and nirvana, good and bad, and rejection and acceptance have become inseparably of a single taste, the Bön body remains in its own state, so you have reached the terminus of expanse meditation.
1️⃣ These views and meditations are in conformity with the system articulated by the later Dzokchen practitioners, so it seems that the two, Bön and Dzokchen, are intimately related.
1️⃣ The organization of Bön It is said that Bön texts are organized in terms of nine vehicles.
1️⃣ The nine are: The four causal vehicles, those of the shen of prediction, the shen of appearance, the shen of magic, and the shen of existence; the four resultant vehicles, those of the layperson, the white a, the seer, and the primordial shen; with one more, the especially great vehicle, that makes nine.
1️⃣ It is said that the shen of prediction has 360 types of divination rituals and 84,000 types of medical diagnoses, the shen of appearance has four chanting meditations, eight lamentations, and forty-two types of pledge, the shen of magic has texts on magical powers for purifying view, the shen of existence has 360 death rites, four doors of subjugation, and eighty-one methods for subduing demons, the layperson has the sutra-class texts on the arising and maturation of the world and its inhabitants, and so forth, the seer has four classes of hundred thousands, the white a has many tantric scriptures, the primordial shen has four classes of scriptures on mind, and the especially great vehicle has five classes of special instruction.
1️⃣ The four causal Bön vehicles abandon the four parts of conceptual thought related to apprehended and apprehender.
1️⃣ The layperson and seer vehicles purify the delusion obstacles, while the white a and primordial-shen vehicles purify the knowledge obstacles.
1️⃣ The especially great vehicle eradicates the innate impurity.
1️⃣ Also, by training for many eons in the four vehicles of causal Bön, you attain the four stages of devoted conduct.
Traversing the path of the layperson and the seer for three countless eons, you attain liberation.
1️⃣ By means of the white a and primordial shen, you attain liberation in a single lifetime.
By means of the especially great, you attain the Bön body in a single life. Thus is it explained.
I have not found texts that explained the spread or standpoint of Bön in detail, so I have written on Bön’s history in Tibet in the early, late, and middle periods as stated in the Single Intention of Drigung.
I have written on the Bön standpoint on view, meditation, the vehicles, and so forth, according to its treatment in what is called the Ornament of Sunlight in the Breach in the Citadel of Secret Mantra, a summary of the portals of Bön composed when countless tantric masters and scholars from Taksik, India, China, Tibet, and other lands had gathered in the secret Bön cave of Yülmang Khar.
Bön monasteries Monasteries that existed in Tibet, such as Shendar Ding, Yungdrung Lhading in Gyalmo Rong, and others were destroyed later by the Chinese imperial army, and the Geluk monastery called Ganden was newly established at Lhading.
Even though a mild edict forbidding the Bön system was proclaimed, it seems that nowadays quite a few Bön centers still exist in Gyalmo Rong, Tsakho, and other places.
1️⃣ Concluding verses Dharma and Bön are considered contradictory, but Dharma has Bön mixed in, and Bön has Dharma mixed in, So one such as I, lacking the dustless eye of Dharma, Is wary of trying to make distinctions between Dharma and Bön.
1️⃣ You denigrate Bön, but when you reach a crisis, You ask a Bönpo with his divining cords what to do and not to do; You enjoy Bön-style chanting and collect ritual materials, And everyone hopes to be helped by Bön devices.
When you think about it, in this lifetime What leisure is there to do elaborate things like these?
Now, when you have some leisure, attained just once, Who would not constantly cultivate contemplation?
1️⃣ If you do only a few deeds, then act on the holy Dharma; If you utter only a few utterances, then utter the talk of Dharma; If you think only a few thoughts, then ponder karma and its results; If you go to only a few destinations, then go to solitary places.
1️⃣ This account is neither Dharmic nor worldly; It is neither useful nor useless; It is neither extensive nor condensed; What I have related is neither clear nor unclear.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation the history of the Bön philosophical system.
1️⃣ Chinese Traditions: Non-Buddhist III.
The History of Sciences and Philosophical Systems in the Land of Great China I shall relate how, in due order, from out of the broad path Of the cosmic wind of the Conqueror’s deeds, The sun, moon, and stars of Dharma, Bön, and Veda appeared In the sky-like vastness of the great land of Mahācīna.
THE THIRD BASIC OUTLINE topic is the history of the philosophical systems in China.
This great country, China, is called Shenzhou in the native language and is known far and wide as “the sacred continent.”
1️⃣ There are also those who identify Shenzhou with the continent of Videha.
The Indians call it Mahācīna.
Mahā means “great” and cīna is a corruption of the Chinese Qin.
Among the Chinese kings, there was, during the Qin dynasty, a mighty and powerful king named Shihuang who conquered many countries on the frontiers and in the central regions.
On account of this the people of the frontier applied the name of his kingdom to the larger country, calling it “the realm of Qin.”
Apparently, the pronunciation of Qin gradually became corrupted, so that it came to be pronounced as “Cīna.”
The Tibetans call it Gyanak, because the Chinese people mostly wear black-colored clothes, and they call the Holy Land Gyagar, because the people of the Middle Country mostly wear white cotton cloth.
However, when writing it, Tibetans do not write rgya dkar but rgya gar, because in the vernacular it is customary to read dkar po as gar po.
1️⃣ Some scholars offer other etymologies, but these are just figments of their own imagination.
How various traditions arose among the philosophical systems in this great country: A reliable Chinese history explains it thus: Although a number of miscellaneous minor traditions appeared in this land, they were of short duration; there are, however, three great traditions that clarify the ultimate nature of things: Ru, Dao, and Jing.
Of those, the first is like a star, the second is like the moon, and the third is like the sun.
1️⃣ Here, accordingly, I shall explain A. The histories of the first two traditions, B. The histories of some miscellaneous traditions, and C. The history of the Buddhist tradition.
A. The histories of the first two traditions The history of the tradition known as the “star-like Ru” The history of the tradition known as the “star-like Ru”: Although ru is a term for letters and means “the way of letters,” the master Anu says: I shall explain the joining of letters Because it is the basis of all Buddhist instruction, The ground for reciters of the Veda, And the basis of all names, words, and expressions.
In conformity with this statement, this tradition is not merely a system for reading and writing letters but also includes many other subjects — various sciences, the principles of worldly conduct, and so forth.
Thus, if one translates the sense of ru, it means “a book of instruction” or “means for conveying knowledge.”
a. The history of Ru The first of all the kings of China, Fu Xi, was capable of founding on his own the sciences and the principle of distinguishing between what should be adopted and what should be rejected.
He bestowed these upon his wise minister, Cang Jie, who was the first to invent Chinese letters, which he established in terms of six types: pictograph, simple ideograph, compound ideograph, phonetic compound, mutual explanatories, and phonetic loans.
1️⃣ He also introduced the practice of writing with a lacquer stylus on a bamboo slate.
The letters of that time were round in shape and called zhuanzi (seal characters).
Later on, Li Si, the minister of the King Qin Shihuang, set to work with the idea of facilitating writing, and invented the letters known as lizi (clerical style).
1️⃣ General Meng Tianyong made a brush from the tail of a hare and ink from pine soot, and wrote on silk cloth.
1️⃣ Again, in later times, the eunuch Cai Lun invented paper.
1️⃣ Then, the “regular style” of writing called zheng kai and the “running script” called caozi (cursive characters) gradually appeared.
1️⃣ Because of their convenience, they gradually spread and writing became an exceedingly easy matter, but for the most part, the caozi conflicted with the six original types.
Because of the spread of many treatises that were specious, meaningless, and mistaken, the contributions of Li Si and Meng Tian, while immediately useful, were in the end recognized as highly inadequate.
1️⃣ This is the account found in impartial sources of later times.
The origin of the treatises: The first king, Fu Xi, composed a text on the bagua called Lianshan; it was the first of the great texts to appear, and it became the principal treatise on the subject.
1️⃣ He also composed a work entitled Neijing on the inner principle for clearly knowing the ways things are in reality.
Then there appeared what are known today as the wujing, or “five classics”: the Yijing (Classic of Changes), the Shijing (Classic of Odes), the Shujing (Classic of Records), the Lijing (Classic of Rites), and the Chun Qiu (Spring and Autumn Annals).
The Yijing was written by the aforementioned Fu Xi; the authors of the remaining four have not been determined. These five texts are the basis for the Ru tradition.
However, the five texts themselves are not called Ru but are referred to as Jing (classics).
1️⃣ The actual Ru consists of those five texts along with their annotations and supplementary literature.
The founding teacher is known as Kongfuzi (Confucius) or Kongzi.
The Tibetans do not pronounce his name as it is in Chinese but call him Kongtse.
He was born in the country of Shandong, one of the thirteen great provinces of China, toward the end of the dynasty known as Zhou Wang during the time of Zhou Jing Wang, not many years after Buddha’s appearance in the world.
Accounts and biographies of him are well known throughout China, and he was regarded as an especially eminent person.
The systematic treatises composed by him are the authoritative basis for contemporary Chinese law and for the code of conduct for the three types of persons: the powerful, the weak, and the middling.
From his time down to the present, despite many changes of government, it is the system of Kongzi alone that has been regarded as preeminent.
Even the royal custom of honoring Kongzi’s portrait and his title of National Preceptor has continued down to the present.
1️⃣ From earlier times down to the present, the lineal descendent of Kongzi has been granted the hereditary title of gong (duke), and it is said that the gong of the present day is the seventy-third lineal descendent of Kongzi.
The Tibetans call Kongzi “miraculous king” and believe him to have been a king possessed of magical powers.
1️⃣ In some Chinese divinatory rituals, the principles of meditating on Kongzi’s higher realization, and so forth, are presented.
Some other texts call him “Kongzi the craftsman,” as he was understood to be skilled in craftsmanship. All of this seems to me just groping in the dark.
Now, Confucius was the illuminator of the Ru tradition, but he wrote only a few of its basic verse texts; his disciples and grand-disciples commented extensively upon them in what are known as the sishu, or “four textbooks.”
All Chinese scholars first study these later writings and make them the basis of their education.
The four textbooks are the Daxue (Great Learning), the Zhongyong (Doctrine of the Mean), the Lunyu (Analects), and the Mengzi (Book of Mencius).
The first of them, the Daxue, is a small text by Kongzi that was added to by Zengzi, who put a series of questions to Kongzi.
1️⃣ The Zhongyong was written by Zi Si.
The Lunyu was edited by Zi Lu, Zi Chang, and Zi Xia.
The Mengzi takes its title from the name of its author.
1️⃣ These authors were either pupils of Kongzi or pupils of the pupils.
Beginning with the establishment of the Zhou dynasty, the number of treatises greatly increased.
We also know that both earlier and later on, hundreds of teachers who explained the sciences and composed many miscellaneous instructional texts that were added to those earlier texts as appendixes and amplifications.
The tradition of legal writings regulating governmental administration: During Han rule, there was a learned master named Xiao He, who expanded upon the teaching of Kongzi, and so illuminated the Ru way.
Later, a scholar named Zhu Xi, who had studied many religious systems, composed numerous treatises that many have regarded as authoritative down to the present day.
1️⃣ Also, both in earlier and later times, there appeared a great many books called gangjian, which are authoritative historical works resembling what are called in Tibet depther.
1️⃣ Confucian divination Of the many sciences that emerged from this way called Ru, the first to appear concerned divination.
This is because divination is the principal subject matter of the Yijing, the first of the aforementioned wujing.
Because yi has the sense of “exchange” and “change,” when Chinese divination was translated into Tibetan during the Tang dynasty, it was called Spor thang (Thang Changes).
The earlier and later heavenly systems Its history: As already explained above, the first kings to appear in the land of China were the three Huang and then the five Di.
1️⃣ At the time of the first Huang monarch, King Fu Xi, there emerged from the great Huang He (Yellow River) in the province now called Henan, a dragon-horse, with a midsection like a horse and a head and tail like a dragon.
1️⃣ On its back were the bagua or eight designs (trigrams), which, in Tibetan, owing to mispronunciation, are called parkha.
1️⃣ Seeing them, Fu Xi created the bagua emblems.
1️⃣ He expanded the eight bagua to sixty-four by combining the eight trigrams with each other and explained them in a text he composed called Lianshan, which emphasizes gen, the image for which is a mountain.
The designs on the back of the dragon-horse were called Hetu because tu means “design” or “pattern,” and he is the name of the river, that is, the place from which the dragon-horse emerged.
The system of the bagua explained by Fu Xi is called the Early Heavenly System.
Subsequently, Shen Nong composed a work on the Spor thang called Guizang yi, which emphasizes the trigram kun, the image for which is earth.
It is also said that an eagle brought this book from the mountain called Xianyuan, and while there is a text that says, “It was written based on a book in the eagle language,” its account is not credible.
The third Huang king, Yi Xuan Shi (Yellow Emperor), having meticulously observed the planets and stars, and methodically divided the five elements into male and female, then arranged time into years, months, and days and subsumed them under the ten roots and the twelve branches of rat, ox, and the other animals.
1️⃣ As a means to teach this practically, he constructed a useful device in the form of a globe called a huntianyi (armillary sphere). He also designed charts in order to make the revolutions of the planets and stars easy to understand.
The zimingzhong, biao, and so forth of the present day are similar kinds of things.
1️⃣ Moreover, he was the first to build chariots, boats, and forts, and to construct musical instruments, such as the twelve lülü (pitch pipes), weapons of various kinds, and so forth.
1️⃣ Even the various types of common bodily adornments apparently originated with him.
The later heavenly system: In the wood-dragon year, the first heavenly year of the fourth of the five Di kings, Yao Tao Tang Shi (third millennium B.C.E.?), a southern commoner named Yue Shang Shi found a wonderful tortoise, which he presented to the king. Looking at it, the king saw that on the tortoise’s back was an extensive diagram of the divisions of time. Fully comprehending it, he greatly clarified the subject of divination.
From the wood-dragon year down to the fire-dragon year of the twelfth sexegenary cycle when King Qianlong ascended the throne, years have elapsed.
Again, according to other authorities: Although there are stories that a commoner presented a wonderful tortoise to King Yao, there is nothing to the effect that he did anything like utilizing the marks on its shell.
1️⃣ Later on, King Yu of Xia wrote a work on divination based on the bagua designs found on the back of an extraordinary miraculous tortoise, the shengui, which came from the Luo River in the area of Henan.
He called his work Luotu, tu meaning “pattern,” and luo, the aforementioned place of origin.
In any case, the difference between the earlier and later heavenly systems evidently refers to the time prior to the division of heaven and earth in the case of the former and the time after their division in the case of the latter.
1️⃣ Thus, it is believed that the very nature of the bagua is eternally and inherently unchangeable.
The histories merely state that elemental divination was created based on the designs found on the back of a tortoise.
The story of the tortoise being the creator of all things is unknown to Chinese literature or authoritative traditions, so Tibetan writers on Chinese divination who say, basing themselves on those accounts, that the “great golden tortoise” is the eternal, self-originated creator are arrogantly propagating a fiction.
Having pointed that out, there are also many false accounts of the origin of the bagua, the twelve-year cycles, and so forth, but I shall write no more, as it is inopportune to do so.
1️⃣ Further developments Wen Wang, the father of the first king of the Zhou dynasty, was an especially eminent person.
Accepting the early heavenly system as conceived by Fu Xi, he expanded the eight bagua of the later heavenly system into sixty-four by combining the eight trigrams with each other, and he composed an explanatory text on the Spor thang called the Zhou yi, which emphasizes the hexagram qian, the image of which is heaven.
These three texts - the earlier Lianshan and Guizang yi along with this one - are widely renowned as "the three texts on the Spor thang."
After the rule of the Zhou clan came to an end, a violent and ignorant king of the Qin dynasty conceived the idea that divination was a threat to the kingdom because by means of it one could know things that were secret, and he instituted a system of forcibly collecting all the texts, which he then had burned.
1️⃣ The first two treatises disappeared, and only the text of Wen Wang remained, so all later works follow it.
Wen Wang's son, Zhou Gong, composed a text that clearly elucidated his father's thought.
Although it is known that later on even Kongfuzi elucidated the thought of his predecessors very clearly, there appears to be some doubt as to whether the actual text composed by Kongzi on the Spor thang is extant.
It is said that during the period of the Zhou dynasty, several men of discernment wrote quite a number of miscellaneous texts based on the text of Zhou Gong, and that some disciples of Kongzi compiled them into what is called the Shijing.
1️⃣ I think that is why the Shijing is attributed to him.
1️⃣ Chinese scholars of later times call Fu Xi, Wen Wang, Zhou Gong, and Kongzi the four great men.
Those whom the Tibetans call the four receivers are probably those four.
1️⃣ However, owing to orthographic errors or mispronunciation, they write Gong Zi for Kongzi, Ji Gong for Zhou Gong, Ji Nong for Shen Nong, and Wang Tai for Wen Wang.
Although the history of divinatory science in the land of China has just now been explained, the Tibetans of old nevertheless propagated various threads of false information, for example, “Divination originally was taught in China at Five Peaks (Wutai Shan) by Mañjughoṣa,” or “It emerged from the crown of the head of the goddess Vijayā,” or “It was taught by Master Padmasambhava.”
What’s more, the divination texts of reputed Chinese origin that spread in Tibet are unknown in China, not even their titles, so that one has to consider whether they might actually have been written by Tibetans.
2️⃣ In general, one cannot prove that those four great men were emanations of Mañjughoṣa — not even the merest fragments of such stories are known in China, nor do we read that those four men were prophesied by the Buddha.
1️⃣ But I think it can be accepted on the basis of the circumstantial evidence and unanimity of opinion.
1️⃣ c. Other Confucian sciences The history of medicine: The second of the three original Huang kings, Yan Di Shen Nong Shi, wrote the first treatise on medicine.
The diagnosis of illness based on the pulse and the method of understanding the fluctuations of the five elements are distinctive features of his work not found in India or any other country.
I think that even the four tantras of Tibetan medicine have their ultimate origin in China, because in them, the five elements are not reckoned as they are in the Indian system, that is, earth, water, fire, wind, and space, but as wood, fire, earth, metal, and water, and the arteries are called tshön, kan, and chak, which are obvious mispronunciations of the Chinese cun, guan, and chi.
A minister of King Shun named Yu invented the five-stringed qin (guitar) and the twenty-five-stringed se (zither), which are musical instruments.
He composed a treatise on song called Shao, and I think the contemporary dance-opera called changzhi is based upon it.
Many texts on poetics appeared over time, and it seems there are many more poetical figures of speech than are known in Tibet.
Moreover, historical literature and writings on technology, geomancy, physiognomancy, prognostics, and other topics have existed from earliest times.
Later on, the number of such compositions greatly increased, but although they were popular, they appear not to have been included among the great texts.
The standpoint of the Confucian system A brief explanation of the standpoint of the system known as Ru: Among the actual root texts of this school there is no explanation at all of the principles of samsara or nirvana, bondage and freedom, the designation of the six classes of beings, past and future lives, karma and its result, and so forth.
1️⃣ Consequently, of the multitude who studied Ru, except for one or two who have a predisposition toward Dharma from a previous life, the vast majority are contented with just the things of this life.
When someone explains the principles of cause and effect and so forth, others say, “If there were such principles, they necessarily would have been explained in the texts of the early kings, Kongzi, and others, but such is not the case.”
Extraordinary persons like King Fu Xi Shi, Kongfuzi, and others thought that the people of their time were not vessels to whom the principles of samsara and nirvana and the like could be taught, and so in the wujing and sishu they chiefly explained the principles of human conduct and other methods beneficial for the time, but they never wrote a single word to prove that there were no past and future lives, karma and result, and so forth, as did the extremist Lokāyatas.
1️⃣ In response to a disciple who asked Kongzi, “What happens after death,” he did not say, “There is no future life,” but replied, “That belongs to what is hidden; I explain the principles of what is presently manifest.”
1️⃣ Again, when Kongzi was explaining the characteristics of the great man, his disciple Yan Hui asked, “Is the man possessing such characteristics so-and-so of such-and-such a place?”
mentioning the names of some. To each, Kongzi said, “No.” “
Are you such a one?” his disciple asked. “
How could I be?” he said. “
1️⃣ Well, if there is some such individual at present, who is it?”
he asked. In reply, Kongzi said, "Such a one will appear in the West," implying that only the Buddha is such a model individual.
1️⃣ Even the principles of the stages and path are to be found among what seem to be the hidden meanings of the texts written by Fu Xi and Kongfuzi.
According to some of the direct disciples of our glorious lama, the omniscient Rölpai Dorjé, he said, "It is permissible to explain the meaning of the Yijing in accordance with the highest secret mantra."
According to one history, at the time of the Jin dynasty, two experts in exegesis, the heshang Faxian and Daoming, elucidated the meaning of both Ru and Daoshi texts in conformity with Buddhism.
Again, in a later history of religion in China, it is written that, "The texts of the Ru teacher Kongzi outwardly teach governance and inwardly the stages of ascending the noble path, so they do not contradict the teaching of the Buddha."
As it is difficult for those who have not studied Buddhism to understand such a point, it obviously cannot enter the minds of those who have studied only Ru.
The principal subject matter of the five great texts are the wuchang (five virtues) and so forth, that is, ren, yi, li, zhi, and xin.
In Chinese, wuchang means the system of five "traditions" or "constants."
1️⃣ Ren is gentleness of character; yi is kindness or affection; li is proper ritual behavior; zhi is wisdom; and xin is reliability.
The four textbooks known as the sishu also elucidate them extensively.
What noble worldly persons have said, that "One must hold those five as dear as life," has become proverbial.
1️⃣ Cosmogony, cosmology, and eschatology According to the Yijing, the origin of heaven, earth, and humanity apparently are as follows: "The time before the formation of heaven and earth is called huntun (chaos).
1️⃣ It was mixed and tangled, cloudy and indistinct." "
1️⃣ It" seems to refer to something that cannot be identified, analyzed, or designated.
In most apotropaic rituals, it is said that "At first, there was nothing whatsoever"; the Yijing is evidently the source for that.
1️⃣ Then came the taiji, or the "ultimate superiority," meaning "inherent nature," and "inherent character," "reality itself," or "the ultimate nature."
Just as all entities have their individual efficacious capacity, in the same way huntun, too, is believed to have a special capacity for producing the heaven and so forth.
By its own nature it shook and quaked, and from that there arose the liangyi, the "two aspects" or the "two inherent natures."
Those two are the male aspect and the female aspect.
1️⃣ They also refer to a capacity like that of a father and mother as the planter and receiver of a seed.
Then those two met, joined like a male and a female, and shook and settled, owing to which there emerged the sixiang or "four transformations": great male and little male, great female and little female.
1️⃣ Once again, from the union of the male and female aspects arose what are known as the bagua, or spar kha, and the jiugong, or the nine palaces.
After that, the capacities of both became clear and shone, lit up, and shook, and that which stayed up above, the sharper parts, was called tian, or heaven: that time was called "the time of the separation of heaven."
The parts that were muddy and unclear, heavy, firm, and dull, remained permanently below, and were called di, or earth: that time was called "the time of the closing of the earth."
1️⃣ After heaven and earth had come into existence, the vital power of heaven descended, and the vital power of earth ascended, and as a result of their contact, humanity came into being: that time is called "the time of the coming into existence of humanity."
The trio of heaven, earth, and humanity are also called the three excellences, the three powers, and the three finalities.
2️⃣ In apotropaic rituals, it is said: "The vigorous father, say, is the pinnacle in heaven.
1️⃣ The vigorous mother, say, is the maternity on the earth.
1️⃣ From the coming together of the two in sexual intercourse..." and so forth.
1️⃣ 1398 This also appears in the chants.
Heaven has the sense of "capacity" or "system of conduct"; earth is believed to have the capacity to generate things.
However, the pale blue sky and the ground are also termed heaven and earth, and the sky is thought by most people to be dark blue and round, the earth yellow and square.
Although in this system the heavens are counted as nine in number, there is no distinction between higher or lower.
This scheme occurs in Tibet, where the nine were thought to be equivalent to the seven underground levels, so that by adding the word “level,” a chant says: “Of the nine heavenly levels, above”; but this seems to be a fabrication.
The period of time from the initial coming into being of heaven, earth, and humanity until their final destruction is called yi yuan, that is, “one root” or “one beginning.”
The length of one yuan is 129,600 human years, which evidently is the same as the kalpa accepted in our own system.
1️⃣ It is believed that with the destruction of heaven and earth, the huntun and the taiji once again will convulse, and so forth, and so cycle endlessly.
1️⃣ A human being is held to be a material object that is a coagulation of the vital power and liquid essence of other material objects.
Since the Chinese have no notion of the four kinds of birth, they cannot say to which birthplace humanity belonged when it first came into being.
Nor is there any explanation in the early texts of this system to the effect that when heaven and earth were divided into two, heaven had human features.
Not only that, there was no notion of what occurs after death or of the six classes of beings.
In a text written by a later scholar named Zhu Xi, who had studied many religious systems, there is a statement that: After a person dies, their life-soul or vitality — the sanhun, or “three souls,” obtained from the father — soars upward into the sky and becomes shen (spirit), whereas the liupo — the six souls or vitalities obtained from the mother — sink into the earth, where they become a demon called a gui (ghost).
1️⃣ It would appear that the notion of six souls in the Tibetan rituals for calling the wandering soul and for the violent destruction of enemies has its origin in some similar conception.
Later on, the Chinese say that all worldly happiness and suffering are effected by tian, or heaven, and that pigs, sheep, and other animals have been created by heaven as food for humans, so they are like vegetables, and there is no fault in killing them.
1️⃣ There are many gods that have human features, such as Yu Huang and others, and an array of many guishen, or gods and demons.
1️⃣ They bury the corpse of the deceased under the ground and worship it, making food offerings to it in the belief that the deceased will be capable of enjoying them.
1️⃣ It seems that these are a mix of various barbarian, Daoshi, and other systems, and that some even blend in Buddhism.
1️⃣ Confucianism vis à vis Buddhism In the root text of Kongzi’s textbook, the Daxue, it says: The Way of Great Learning depends on clarifying illustrious good qualities; doing good to people depends on achieving the highest good.
1️⃣ After that is understood, it is proper that it be upheld; after it has been upheld, it is proper that it be stabilized; after it has been stabilized, it is proper that one become happy; after one has become happy, it is proper to offer instruction; after instruction has been offered, it is proper to understand it.
2️⃣ Whatever there is has an origin and an end, and activities have their beginning and end.
1️⃣ When one understands what comes before and what comes after, one is close to the Way.
It is easy to understand that what is explicitly shown by those words is the principle of human conduct, but I think it teaches something like this as its hidden meaning: To clarify what is and is not the path is what is meant by “illustrious good qualities.”
1️⃣ Ru, or the Way of the Great Learning, illuminates it. “
Doing good to people” means leading sentient beings to the good path.
1️⃣ Knowing that leading others there depends on achieving the highest good, you should initially achieve the good yourself and assist others afterward.
Further, those who are happy should be stabilized in their happiness, and those who are not happy should be made happy.
1️⃣ When you have made them happy and they have become suitable vessels, instruct them in what they should accept and what they should avoid, and it then will be proper to make them understand the principles of samsara and nirvana, and so forth.
1️⃣ Thusly, whatever exists has an initial origin and a subsequent end, so when you fully understand those two, you are close to the Way.
1️⃣ I think the passage has that meaning; the idea of initially ripening your own mind and after that ripening the minds of others is similar to what is found in the subject matter of the Mahayana Dharma system.
1️⃣ Although the text does not use the term buddha, the phrase “achieve the highest good” suggests to my mind that perhaps Kongzi accepted what we call “the stage of a buddha.”
Chinese scholars who have studied those texts and mastered them are given the title xiansheng (teacher).
1️⃣ Although translated literally it means “firstborn,” the sense it has is of “great man.”
1️⃣ In addition, when they have completed their education in the five texts, they receive the title of xiucai (scholar) or zhuangyuan (premier) depending on the degree of their learning.
Studying the textual system thusly, they themselves become scholars.
1️⃣ In addition, when they have mastered the literature of the legal system, they will know how to instruct others in right and wrong.
1️⃣ When scholars have acquired those two qualities, they are worthy to be officials who govern the common people through the legal system and administer the imperial government. In conformity with their degree of merit, they are appointed to the ranks of officials with their varying official duties.
To make an analogy with Tibet, the five texts are like the five root texts of the traditional curriculum, Ru is like the entirety of the Buddhist canon, and receiving the titles xiansheng, xiucai, and zhuangyuan through the study of those texts is similar to the way Tibetans are given the titles of geshe, kachu, and rapjampa.
1️⃣ Appointment to the rank of an official who instructs the people in what is right and wrong is similar to the appointment of a qualified educator as a master in charge of courses at a larger or smaller monastery.
Nowadays, because of the time we live in, such standards are rare, and this seems to be the case both in China and Tibet.
There are also those who have a good understanding of the great Chinese textual systems and have no interest in official rank and the like, nor the desire for the householder’s activities of business or farming, and they go to isolated ravines and reflect on the meaning of the textual systems they have studied.
If a disciple should appear, they teach him, and they live out their lives with few goals or activities.
1️⃣ They resemble those Dharma practitioners who, when they have brought their study and reflection to completion, renounce worldly life and practice in solitude; yet in both countries, such persons appear to be very few.
Kongzi evidently respected the Buddha, but at that time the doctrine of the Buddha had not yet come to China, so neither good nor bad opinions of Buddhism are expressed in the textbooks composed by him.
Zhufuzi, who also had knowledge of Buddhism, praises the Dharma in his works and writes not a word in condemnation.
1️⃣ A later minister by the name of Zhouzi expressed prejudiced opinions.
He said: Because all the happiness and prosperity of the commoners comes from the power of the king’s merit, the one having the greatest kindness toward all the people is the king; and because your parents have produced your body, those who are the kindest to you are your parents.
Therefore, you must repay their kindness.
Intelligent commoners should administer the laws, the courageous should wage war, and the ordinary people should pay their taxes.
1️⃣ So long as your parents are alive, you should honor and serve them, and after they have died, you should make offerings to their bones and their name.
Acting in this way is the excellent system of the nobles of former times.
Later, a certain Śākyamuni, ignoring the kindness of his king and parents, left home and taught a Dharma system in which one provides food and clothing for oneself alone.
The foolish king Han Ming of the Yongping era spread that Way in the land of China, and the family lines of many people died out, and the excellent Way of earlier times declined.
Now Buddhism is not concerned just with the kings and parents of the present life, but aims to free all sentient beings in numbers as vast as the sky from suffering and establish them in happiness, and it aims to free them not merely from transitory sufferings, but from all the general and specific suffering belonging to samsara, and to place them in inexhaustible, utmost bliss.
1️⃣ And so we answer this ignorant person: To compare the extent of gratitude in our system with that of theirs is to compare the magnitude of the sky with the eye of a needle.
1️⃣ Although there are other scattered written accounts denigrating Buddhadharma along the lines of the foregoing, not a single logical reason is offered in support; there is only nonsense uttered under the influence of clinging to wrong views.
From the introduction of the teaching into China down to the present, with the exception of one or two emperors, most have been devoted solely to the teaching, and as a consequence, such vulgar talk is like an echo.
Although some common Chinese of the present day repeat those criticisms, there is an apt proverb: If an old dog barks, The others run for no reason.
The history of the moon-like Dharma system, the tradition of Bön called Daoshi a. Origins The history of the moon-like Dharma system, the tradition of Bön called Daoshi (Priests of the Dao): The founding teacher of this system was called Laojun (Lord Lao).
There seems to be both a divine and a human Laojun.
The former, the divine Laojun, is called Taishang Laojun, which, in Tibetan translation, is Most Excellent Chief Lord.
It is said that he appeared when, according to the Chinese system, heaven and earth first came into being.
According to some, he is identified with the god Brahma, which I think is acceptable, as it seems to agree with the explanation in the abhidharma and elsewhere that in the beginning, when the world came into being, the immeasurable palaces of Mahabrahma and Brahma emerged sequentially, and that his name, Most Excellent Chief Lord, fits with the standpoint of those who say that Brahma is the creator of the world.
It is said that from then on Laojun revealed eighty-one human emanations, among which our teacher the Buddha is counted.
1️⃣ This seems to conform with the view of proponents of the principle of the ten avatars of Vishnu.
1️⃣ The human Laojun is apparently identified as one of the emanations.
The time of his appearance is roughly the same as that of Kongzi.
Having spent eighty-two years in his mother's womb, he had white hair when he was born, so he was called Laozi, "Old Man." Later, it seems, his followers gave him the pleasant name of Laojun.
I have seen an account to the effect that he obtained seventy-two chapters of heavenly Dharma from a cave, studied them, and spread the system of Daoshi.
My omniscient lama said: "Laojun was the same as Shenrap, the teacher of Bon"; I think perhaps xian, in shengxian, or "great man" in Chinese, was called shen through mispronunciation.
There also appeared Yuanshi Tianzun, who was similar to Laojun.
Although I have not seen his history, I think after researching him he may be identified as one of the eighty-one emanations.
1️⃣ Thus, the source of the Way of Daoshi is Taishang Laozhun, who is identical to the god Brahma, and in the human realm his emanations Laozi, Yuanshi Tianzun, and others, who spread it extensively.
Teachings The characteristics of the Daoshi Dharma: It is said that they accept what is formless, shapeless, colorless, and unsurpassable as the great self-originated path.
1️⃣ Because I have not seen the great Daoshi texts, I do not know the details concerning their standpoints on samsara and nirvana, bondage and liberation, and so forth.
According to some small books of selections I have seen, it seems there are many gods with human features, and powerful spirits — the lords of the five great rugged mountains of China, the lords of the four great rivers, and the lords of the wind, rain, lightning, and so forth — in relation to whom various rituals are prescribed.
When worshipping them, there are mantras for purifying the body, mouth, and tongue.
There are instructions for rites of bathing and purity, and there are a multitude of explanations included in the special instructions on concentration, such as the means for suppressing the breath, praising shen, that is, the vital power of the gods, and remaining with the mind undisturbed.
1️⃣ There are histories of the famous badong shengxian, or “eight great men,” and others who attained the worldly supernormal powers, and of the mighty Zhang Dashi, who intimidated many wicked spirits and commanded all the local and guardian deities in the area of the present-day great palace in Beijing.
1️⃣ It is known that when his clan descendents approach the palace, the great spirits of that place welcome them.
1️⃣ Moreover, there are many about whom stories are told regarding their attainment of supernormal powers, magical powers, and so forth.
1️⃣ To judge by that, there are evidently instructions for accomplishing a simple one-pointed concentration of the desire-realm mind, but I think it unlikely that they have a correct method for realizing the path of liberation.
There are a great many instructions dealing with the performance of activities related to sacred objects, the analysis of lightning, good-luck ceremonies, and spells and mantras composed by the gods, seers, and others.
There are two kinds of practitioners: householders and those who have forsaken family life.
The latter take something like vows, which they apparently guard well. Although I heard it said that the southern Chinese were diligent in their studies and that there were many scholars, I had no useful discussions with them.
1️⃣ The north is a great nation, with an excess of diversions, and those who have studied deeply are rare, so that when I questioned those who claimed to be scholars, few could elucidate flawlessly and perfectly the individual traditions without confusing the three systems.
Since I, who had not studied Chinese literature, could not read many of the texts myself, I had to listen to what others read, so that I have just a partial view of the origins and standpoints of Ru and Daoshi, and I dare not write more than just this.
The history of some miscellaneous traditions: During the time of the great Han, there came from the island of Singhala a non-Buddhist pandit called the Great Brahman.
1️⃣ When he related to the Chinese king Yao Xiang the reasons why it was necessary for him to promulgate his philosophical system, a heshang named Daoyong fluently recited the Vedas in Sanskrit as well as many other Vedic texts known to non-Buddhists.
1️⃣ As the heshang was versed in three times more texts than he, the pandit was cowed and prostrated to the heshang.
Then the king, realizing the pandit’s religious system was useless, sent him back to his own country.
It is for that reason that down to the present day, the debased views of the extremists have not appeared in China.
During a period of disorder in the time of the Tang, many troops from Tukhara were brought in who settled permanently in China. Gradually increasing in numbers, they came to be called Huizi or Huige.
Also, after Genghis Khan, many Mongolians came to China and settled there. had conquered the western regions, a commoner from the ocean island of Xiyang who was an expert in a Dharma system called Tianzhu, or the “Lord of Heaven,” followed him on his return home and came to the land of China, where his Dharma gradually increased and has existed down to the present day.
The descendents of the Tokharians practiced their own tradition and dwelled among the Chinese, but it seems that not only did the Chinese not adopt their religion, they did not even intermarry with them.
1️⃣ They say: “all worldly happiness and suffering, and good and bad, is ordained by heaven.”
It seems that Tian means god and heaven, and has other senses as well, but the Huizi and others like them do not make any distinctions beyond the general senses of the word Tian.
It seems they do not take refuge in or offer worship to worldly gods.
1️⃣ They say that Tian collects the consciousness of a dead person and Tian ordains where it is to be born again.
As to how consciousness takes birth, they state various things: they say that it takes birth when, after this world has been destroyed, a new world comes into existence, consciousness having in the interim subsisted mixed in with the sky; they say that souls take birth immediately; or they say that their continuity as a human being is cut.
The consciousness of an animal killed by an adherent of their philosophical system is sent to Tian, who takes care of it; but the consciousness of an animal killed by another who is not of their religion is thrown into limbo, where it wanders; thus, to eat the flesh of an animal killed by others is a great sin.
1️⃣ Unfortunate adherents of this tradition whose continuity as a human being has been cut are born as pigs: if you eat pork, your continuity as a human being is cut.
If you do not keep yourself clean, Tian is displeased, so they say that purificatory practices such as bathing and so forth are very important.
1️⃣ Apart from these things, they know nothing of the principles of samsara and nirvana, bondage and freedom, view and conduct, and so forth.
Thus, these people have no system of reasoning like that in the philosophical systems of true extremists, so they resemble those who are categorized as barbarians.
Although nowadays the Huizi are greatly increasing in all countries, nevertheless, it will not be long before they are subdued by the kalkin Raudracakrin, who will clear away their wrong views as the sun clears away the darkness and set them on the right path.
1️⃣ How that happens will be explained below.
1️⃣ Concluding verses Those confused even about what to do and not to do in this realm of appearance Were unfit vessels for the ever-desirable Dharma, So the Conqueror selected, as the first Chinese teachers, Sages who illumined an authoritative code of worldly conduct.
1️⃣ Those who understood the difference between appropriate and deceptive methods Composed quite a number of purificatory texts, So the stains of confusion were washed away, and the minds of disciples Made fit to be vessels for the nectar of holy Dharma.
1️⃣ Although some were purified in that way, those clay pots So unfortunate that they could not in their present life contain The lion’s milk of the holy Dharma, reached their goal by gaining A visual and auditory connection with the Conqueror’s doctrine.
Not long after the kalkin Raudracakrin has come to Shambhala, Even the barbarians, with their ironclad debased views, Will certainly be changed into the precious jewel of converts Through the excellent alchemy of his deeds.
This account of the origins of the Veda And Bön in the land of China Is related in the manner of one who has seen things only hazily, Not of one who has attained exact certainty.
1️⃣ From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation the history of the Vedic and Bön philosophical systems in the land of Mahācīna.
1️⃣ Chinese Traditions: Buddhist.
1️⃣ The history of the Dharma system of the insiders, the Buddhists I will now relate how the ambrosial rain of the holy Dharma, which bestows an abundance Of benefits and happiness, descended on the land of China From the self-created cloud mass of the Conqueror’s deeds, Gently saturating all the fields of converts.
THE ACCOUNT of how the sun-like Dharma system known as Jing, the precious teaching of the Buddha, came to the land of China, is twofold: How it came from India, and.
How it came from Tibet.
How Buddhism came from India a. Historical developments Before Buddhism It seems that even before the dissemination of the actual teaching in the land of China, there were some teachings that resembled it in part.
The teacher Mozi taught that you should devote yourself solely to the welfare of others without regard for your own body or life, and that the nature of the mind is primordially pure but polluted by adventitious stains and altered by karma.
The teacher Liehzi taught that everything is dependently originated.
At that time, there were no relations with India, so that not even the word buddha was known in this country, yet Liehzi, cognizing through his clairvoyance, wrote in one of his texts: “In the west there will appear one who performs great deeds naturally and possesses extraordinary perspicacity, a noble being beyond the realm of expressibility; his name will be Buddha. ”
This is the first time the sweet name of Buddha was uttered in this country.
1️⃣ There is also the story of the teacher Zhuangzi who dreamed he was a butterfly and, after awakening, reflected upon it and realized that everything that appears is without any existence at all.
The teacher Ye Su, or Protector of the World, is known to have had a miraculous birth.
He composed a treatise that taught a ten-limbed vow of not taking human life, and so forth, that the experience of happiness arises as a result of virtuous actions, that one falls into hell through the ripening of evil acts and suffers agonies there forever, and that deliberately committed misdeeds are not purified by confession.
All of this is explained in the History of Buddhism in China. While it seems these were excellent ways that arose due to Buddha’s deeds, their spread was neither extensive nor long lasting.
On the eighth day of the fourth month of the wood-male-tiger year, in the twenty-sixth year of the reign of Zhao Wang, the fifth king of the Zhou dynasty, a great effulgence of golden light appeared in the southwest border region and pervaded all the land.
1️⃣ The king saw it and questioned the oracles, who said it was a sign that a great lord had been born in that direction, and they prophesied that when a thousand years had passed his philosophical system would appear in China.
1️⃣ That phenomenon was recorded in the annals.
1️⃣ From that wood-tiger year to the fire-hare year of the thirteenth sexegenery cycle, years passed, and to the iron-monkey year of the thirteenth sexegenery cycle, years have passed.
Again, some also say that this occurred in the twenty-fourth year of King Zhao, a water-bird year; according to some Tibetan texts, it was in the twenty-fourth year of King Mu, which is obviously a scribal error.
According to the writings of the heshangs: Our teacher was born at that time. Then, when he was twenty-nine years old, on the eighth day of the second month, he entered the homeless life.
When he was thirty, on the eighth day of the second month, he became a buddha, and for the next forty-nine years he turned the wheel of Dharma.
1️⃣ When he was seventy-nine, on the fifteenth day of the second month in the water-monkey year, he entered nirvana.
1️⃣ Although such a chronology is acceptable, I suspect that the source might be the “Lion’s Roar” chapter of the Great Nirvana Sutra, where this question-and-answer may be found: The birth of the Blessed One, the entrance into homelessness, the attainment of complete buddhahood, and the turning of the wheel of the Dharma all took place on the eighth day in the first half of a lunar month; why is only the appearance of his uncorrupted nirvana associated with the fifteenth day?
The coming of Buddhism The nirvana of the Teacher occurred in the fifty-third year of King Mu. Counting years from then, the teaching came to China in the eighth year of the Yong Ping era of King Ming Di of the great Han dynasty.
During the night of an auspicious day in the third year of that king’s reign, the king dreamed that a great being more than three fathoms in height, of a golden complexion, adorned with the marks of a great being, and radiating sunlight, came down from the sky and approached the golden-throne room in the palace.
When the king questioned his ministers the next day, minister Fu Yi suggested: “I have heard it said that in the time of a Zhou king there was in India a sage called Buddha, whose body was well proportioned and more than three fathoms tall, whose skin was of a golden complexion and radiant, and who could move through the sky.
1️⃣ Perhaps there is a connection between this and his majesty’s dream.”
Then the king looked into the old records and found the prophecy from the time of King Zhao of the Zhou dynasty; calculating the date, he saw that it tallied with the years that had passed.
1️⃣ The king was very happy and sent an envoy, Wang Zun, to India in search of Buddhism.
At that time, the arhat Mātaṅga, who was of the clan of Kāśyapa, and the pandit Bharaṇa, who, owing to a mispronunciation of the Sanskrit, was called Falan in China, saw that the time had come to spread the teaching to China.
They loaded a white horse with a portrait scroll of the Teacher and some Mahayana and Hinayana sutras, along with a quantity of relics, and set out from India.
They met the envoy in that part of China called Loyokhyi and, together with Wang Zun, arrived at the royal palace, where the king welcomed them and paid them homage.
1️⃣ When they presented the supports of the teaching to the king for him to see, he was very pleased with the portrait of the Teacher, which appeared identical to the figure he had seen in his former dream.
1️⃣ The arhat instilled faith in the king by performing some miracles, and the king erected a temple called Baima Si (White Horse Monastery) and installed the two Indians as recipients of offerings.
1️⃣ The indigenous Bönpos, after offering many reasons, said to the king, “This tradition conflicts with our own and is unfit to be spread in this country.”
The king replied, "Well, then, cast the scriptures of both into a fire; the ones that remain unburned will be worthy of reverence."
1️⃣ His command was carried out, and the scriptures of the Daoshi were burned up, but the Buddhist scriptures were untouched by the flames, so the two chiefs of the Daoshi, Fei Shucai and Chu Shanxin, jumped into the fire.
The two pandits then ascended into the sky and displayed extraordinary miracles, so that the king, along with his ministers and the common people, gained faith in the Dharma.
The king spoke verses of praise: A fox is not found among lions; A lamp does not shine like the sun and moon; A pond is not as wide as an ocean; A hill does not have the splendor of a lofty mountain.
The auspicious cloud of Dharma covers the world; Its pure rain will quicken the seeds of beings.
Deeds without precedent are now plainly seen And will serve to convert many beings in every direction.
The king had seven temples built in the palace of Henan Fu, the main one being Baima Si, and three temples for nuns.
The king took lay practitioner's vows, and more than a thousand men, led by several great ministers, became monks.
Again, the king asked: "Are there any holy great beings permanently dwelling in our kingdom who are working for the benefit of beings?"
The arhat then described how Ārya Mañjughoṣa dwelt on Five Peaks (Wutai shan).
1️⃣ Then the arhat and the pandit went off to Five Peaks, the field of Mañjughoṣa, and with their divine eye beheld the marvels of that miraculous place.
On their return, they told the king; "During the time of the Buddha Kāśyapa, King Aśoka (304?–232 B.C.E.), with the assistance of the spirits, built 84,000 stupas in a single night containing relics of the Buddha in their inner chambers; we have identified one of them on Five Peaks."
1️⃣ Then the king erected a great stupa containing that very stupa in its inner chamber, which is known nowadays as Dabao Ta (Great Precious Temple), and he founded the monastery of Xiantong Si (Illuminating the Universe Temple).
At Five Peaks and elsewhere, he erected many stupas containing relics in their inner chambers; one of these is contained in the inner chamber of the stupa known nowadays as the White Stupa of Beijing.
Six hundred and twenty men became monks and two hundred and thirty women became nuns.
1️⃣ The arhat translated the Sutra in Forty-two Sections, which is a collection of important passages from the Hinayana sutras, and the first sutra to be translated into Chinese; it still exists today.
The pandit is known to have translated five sutras, including the Sutra of the Ten Stages, but due to the ebb and flow of the teaching, they no longer exist.
Moreover, the teaching was initially established at Jiangnan in the south by a group of six pandits, including Master Āryakāla, the elder Cilukākṣa, the layman Suvinaya, and three others; along with a group of four, consisting of the pandit Dharmakāla, two other upholders of the Mahayana and Hinayana vinaya, and another pandit; as well as the scholar Gaṇottarasena, the layman Zhi Qian, and others.
1️⃣ They were the very best translator-scholars during the time of the great Han dynasty.
Later developments After that, throughout the reigns of the thirteen kings of the Han dynasty, the fourteen kings of the Jin dynasty, the many kings of the former Qin, Huige, and Sui dynasties, the twenty Tang kings and the eighteen Song kings, a great many scholars and adepts arrived in succession from India.
There were innumerable learned heshangs some of whom went to India and others who, even though they did not go, still possessed unimaginably good qualities of scriptural realization.
They translated the word of the Buddha and many treatises into Chinese, and while a great many of them are the subject of wonderful stories of how they served the teaching, I will not write about them out of fear of prolixity; but they may be known from the History of Buddhism in China and elsewhere.
From the time of the Mongol kings on, many Tibetan holy men went to China, too, so that the teaching of the Conqueror increased immensely, as will be discussed below.
The enumeration of the translations of the Buddha’s words and their commentaries: In the time of the Sui king Wen Di, the translations that had been made up till then were catalogued.
1️⃣ After that, twice during the time of the Tang and twice during the time of the Song, the new translations that had appeared in the interim were added and catalogued.
Finally, in the time of the Mongol King Sé Chen, the Tibetan and Chinese Kangyurs were compared, and those texts lacking in the Chinese were translated from Tibetan.
At the end of the compilation were appended twenty-one volumes of Indian treatises and 153 volumes of large texts written by learned heshangs, making 740 volumes in total — for which a new catalogue was made — among which are many sutras, tantras, and treatises that have never been translated into Tibetan.
Buddhist teaching lineages in China Among the Buddhist teachings that spread in the land of China, five lineages are recognized: the vinaya lineage, the secret-mantra lineage, the extensive-practice lineage, the profound-view lineage, and the essential-meaning lineage.
Although the continuity of vows that had been transmitted from the arhat Mātaṅga lasted for a while, the continuity was later broken, apparently, and a tantric master named Kumāraśrī, an expert in countless subjects and possessor of clairvoyance and magical powers, came to the land of China.
1️⃣ At the time of his arrival, the sandalwood statue of Lord Buddha also was brought.
King Hong Shi paid Kumāraśrī honor, and the latter, along with eight hundred learned disciples headed by Seng Zhao, translated many sutras and treatises, and the Mahayana doctrine was spread widely through their explanations.
In particular, many were allowed to take the vows of a monk and the vows of a bodhisattva.
1️⃣ The heshangs then introduced the custom of taking the bodhisattva vows after receiving those of the layperson.
Also, the three vinaya masters, Buddhajñāna, Vimalacakṣu, and Dharmāruci, who had come to China with Kumāra, translated many vinaya cycles, such as the four texts, and taught precise guidelines for the training of monks.
Moreover, the elder Saṅghavarma also came and spread the tradition of the vows and the particulars of training in the vinaya, so that the continuity of prātimokṣa vows and bodhisattva vows transmitted from Kumāraśrī and Saṅghavarma has lasted down to the present day.
While there is an account of ten nuns coming to China from India, including the Sinhalese nun Devasarā and others, we do not know whether there was a transmission of nun’s vows descending from them.
It is said that from the four basic transgressions down to the seven Dharmas for resolving disputes, the Chinese vinaya is not different from that of Tibet; the difference is in the matter of various religious practices, which may conform to the customs of the country or be taken from other sects.
1️⃣ The Chinese Buddhists do not eat meat and they do not ride on animals; they carry a begging bowl of the smallest capacity, and the pieces making up the monk’s robe overlap like birds’ feathers.
1️⃣ As there is only a single class of monk in this country, one need not worry about making a mistake in identification, so there is no tradition of sectarian markings for distinguishing one from another.
In Chinese tradition, yellow is the auspicious color of the king and red of the ministers, and the king of that time explicitly forbade either color to clerics.
By virtue of the fact that according to Chinese tradition it is shameful for bare flesh to be exposed, the heshangs spread the custom of wearing dark-colored robes with sleeves.
Later on, Tibetan lamas came who wore the clerical robe according to Tibetan tradition, but they were given explicit permission to do so, as it was the time of the Mongol kings.
The separately developed customs whereby the heshangs wear dark-colored cloth and the Tibetan monks wear red or yellow robes persist to the present day.
The secret-mantra lineage The elder Śrīmitra was the first mantra master to come from India, but apart from the translation of a few dhāraṇīs, such as the Great Peacock, he did not propagate mantra teachings.
While quite a number of contemporary experts in secret-mantra knowledge came with him from India, apart from translating a few mantra texts, they did not give the initiations, instructions, and so forth, to even a single person.
1️⃣ Even the tantric master Kumāraśrī did not generally give them to anyone but one or two suitable persons.
Those who propagated it a bit more widely were Vajrabodhi, a scholar from Malaya in southern India, and his disciple Amoghavajra.
1️⃣ These two arrived together during the time of Tang Ming Wang and initiated a few of the fortunate, headed by the heshangs Chan Shi Yeshé Thayé and Sherap Thayé.
1️⃣ Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra explained the tantric texts, gave special instructions, and performed various religious rituals for the benefit of others.
Amoghavajra initiated the king into the great mandala of Vajradhātu, so the king offered him the title Tripiṭaka Master, Treasury of Gnosis.
1️⃣ On the appearance of an inauspicious star, Amoghavajra performed the worship and fire ritual of Vajradhātuvāgīśvara, and the inauspicious star disappeared.
When he repulsed a foreign army by setting Vaiśrāvaṇa on it, the king offered him a high rank and three thousand householders as his subjects.
He translated seventy-seven volumes of the principal texts of secret mantra.
1️⃣ After initiating his disciple Huilang, or Yeshé Ö, as his successor and as a tantric preceptor, he entered nirvana.
Although some disciples and grand-disciples of Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra attained mantric accomplishments, the continuity of the teaching declined not long afterward.
Although some pandit-adepts, such as the great abbot Dānarakṣita, Dharmabhadra, and others arrived from the Holy Land during the time of the Song and repaired the way, its continuity did not last long because they put too many restrictions on imparting the Buddha word.
Among latter-day heshangs, apart from the widespread recitation of a few dhāraṇīs or mantras, such as the long dhāraṇī of Amoghapāśa and some others, there does not seem to be any practice of the teachings of secret mantra.
1️⃣ Xuanzang and the lineage of extensive practice The lineage of extensive practice: The person known as Thangpa Lama (the “Tang Lama,” i.e., Xuanzang,) was a descendent of the great Han minister Zhong Gong.
1️⃣ He became a monk while still quite young.
1️⃣ His inborn wisdom and self-confidence were matchless.
At the age of eleven, he could fluently recite the Teachings of Vimalakīrti Sutra and the Lotus of the True Dharma Sutra.
2️⃣ Initially, he mastered the cycle of abhidharma texts and then read extensively in the sutras and commentaries that had been translated into Chinese.
As it had been his heart’s desire to travel to India, he learned the vernacular, and at the age of twenty-nine, he skillfully petitioned the king, who granted him a travel permit.
Then, making his way by stages through many countries, he arrived in India.
He went everywhere in India, from the border lands to the central region, and to many different countries, such as Kashmir and others, visiting many holy sites.
1️⃣ He heard many Dharma teachings of both the higher and lower vehicles from many scholars, including Jitāri, that is, Dralé Namgyal.
1️⃣ He chiefly attended the great abbot, the 106-year-old Vinītabhadra, who upheld the Cittamātra philosophical system and dwelled at glorious Nālandā.
1️⃣ According to some, his name was Vinītadeva, and there are those, too, who say that he was, or was not, master Vinītasena, a disciple of Uttarasena.
Moreover, Tang Sanzang Fashi (“Tang Tripiṭaka master,” i.e., Xuanzang) also met Jetāri, the guru of Atiśa, but there are many gurus between Jetāri and Vinītasena, and the chronological inconsistency warrants further investigation.
In any case, over the course of one year and three months he heard the cycle of the five treatises of Maitreya from Vinītabhadra.
Once again, over nine months he heard detailed teachings on valid cognition and abhidharma.
Then, over a three-year period, he heard many other Dharma teachings.
He defeated an extremist opponent in debate and wrote a treatise annihilating wrong views from the Mahayana perspective in verses that captivated the minds of all the scholars.
1️⃣ Moreover, when the scholar Haraprabhā composed a treatise in refutation of Cittamātra, master Xuanzang composed a treatise in three thousand verses called Proof of Harmony, which he presented to the scholar Vinītabhadra, who was very pleased.
As a result of those activities, his renown as a scholar was quite extensive, and the people of the Holy Land called him Mahāyānadeva, or God of the Mahayana, and in a reversal of the usual custom, several Indian scholars received Dharma teachings from him.
He was greatly revered by many rulers, such as King Śīlāditya, King Kumāra, the South Indian king Dhātubhadra, and others.
Although many heshangs who were masters came to India both before and after him, it is certain that he was the only one to attain the rank of master in India and become the recipient of royal offerings.
After an absence of seventeen years, including three years spent in travel, Xuanzang returned to China.
King Zhen Guan (Emperor Taizong, r. 627–50) honored him elaborately, and he presented to the king over six hundred volumes of Indian manuscripts written on palm leaves, many relics and images, and goods of various kinds.
The king installed him in the monastery of Hongfu Si, where together with twelve scholar-heshangs, he translated volumes of Indian works, both the word of the Buddha and its commentaries, the most important of which were the Perfection of Wisdom in a Hundred Thousand Verses and the five treatises of Maitreya.
He also revised many of the old translations.
1️⃣ Then he revived Cien Si, or Jampa Ling Loving Kindness Monastery.
1️⃣ At that time, there were monasteries in China.
1️⃣ By recruiting monks from those monasteries and ordaining new monks, Xuanzang built a monastery with a population of monks, and the master took up residence there.
1️⃣ After the death of King Zhen Guan, his son, King Gao Zong, gave to every fifty monks at the Siming Si Monastery a novice and three betweeners to support them and presented the monastery to the master.
1️⃣ The master then served as abbot of all three monasteries, Hongfu Si, Cien Si, and Siming Si.
He instituted the way of the three stages of the path and the five methods of meditation.
He wrote many treatises, including a commentary on the Perfection of Wisdom in a Hundred Thousand Verses according to the Cittamātra system; an eight-chapter summary of the extensive practice; commentaries on several sutras, such as the Descent to Laṅka and Unraveling of Intention; a commentary on bodhisattva vows, a commentary on abhidharma, a summary of valid cognition, and so forth.
He widely spread the doctrine in general and the Mahayana in particular, most especially the Cittamātra system.
Just to the south of Cien Si, he constructed a very large stupa in the Indian style and offered for deposit Indian manuscripts and relics.
Moreover, he set up many supports, such as a million images made from various materials; he ransomed the lives of ten thousand animals destined for slaughter, distributed alms to ten thousand people, offered a hundred million lamps, and so forth.
Having worked for the welfare of beings for nearly forty years, he entered nirvana at the age of sixty-five.
1️⃣ The lineage of extensive practice, then, is as follows: the Teacher, the Blessed One; the conqueror Ajita; Master Asanga; his younger brother, Vasubandhu; Dharmarakshita; Master Ananda; Master Vinatabhadra; and after him, Tang Sanzang, or Tang Tripitaka Master (Xuanzang).
1️⃣ It was through that master that the lineage spread in China.
The masters Zhiyan, Xianshou (Fazang), and others in the lineage of the profound view heard teachings from Kuiji Fashi, a disciple of Tang San (Xuanzang), and from then on, the lineages of view and practice were united.
1️⃣ The lineage of profound view.
1️⃣ The lineage is as follows: The Teacher, the Blessed One; Jetsun Manjughosa; the glorious protector, Arya Nagarjuna; Master Nilanetri (Having Blue Eyes), that is, Candrakirti, who was so called because he had a blue mole resembling an eye on each of his cheeks; the noble Bhavaviveka the Later, or Bhavaviveka the Lesser; the noble Prajnarasmi; and the Chinese master Yeshe Pal.
1️⃣ He may have received the direct transmission that originated with Nagarjuna himself.
Next came the master Yeshe Lodro (Huisi), from whom the zhizhe dashi, that is, the great master Yeshe Den (Zhiyi, –), heard it.
Zhiyi and the Tiantai Zhiyi was like a great chariot from whom the lineage of the view spread in China. He was very highly educated, and his practice was excellent.
1️⃣ His clairvoyance was unimpeded, and through the power of his awakening mind, he required no assistance in taming those to be tamed.
He became religious instructor to two kings of the southern Chen dynasty and to the great king Wen Di of the Sui dynasty.
1️⃣ His deeds were incomparably great.
He constructed a great monastery on Mount Tiantai called Guoqing Si and a great monastery on Yuchuan Mountain as well.
With those two monasteries as the principal centers, he founded thirty-six monastic schools for teaching and study, printed fifteen copies of the complete Kangyur and Tengyur, and erected images of buddhas and bodhisattvas made from gold, silver, brass, sandalwood, and other materials.
He had more than disciples who took vows, thirty-two of whom definitely carried on the lineage, and countless persons with whom he had a Dharma connection.
He organized the vows by dividing the precious scriptures into five periods: the Sutra of the Ornamented Tree period, the Deer Park period, and the Great Extensive Sutra, Perfection of Wisdom, and Great Nirvana Sutra periods.
1️⃣ He instituted a Way called the eight entrances: dunmen, or the sudden entrance; jianmen, or the gradual entrance; mimi, the secret or special entrance; the indefinite entrance; the entrance to the piṭakas; the entrance to awareness; the entrance to discrimination; and the entrance to perfection.
Encouraged by King Wen Di, he wrote nearly forty volumes of treatises, including the Stages of Entry into the Dharmadhātu and others.
1️⃣ The notes written by his disciples on the public explanations he gave in classes on the Flower Ornament Sutra, the cycle of perfection of wisdom sutras, the Lotus of the True Dharma Sutra, and the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way fill fifty volumes.
Having turned the wheel of Dharma, above all the system of the protector Nāgārjuna, for thirty years, at the beginning of his sixtieth year, in the seventeenth year of the reign of Kai Huang, on the twenty-fourth of midwinter, he entered nirvana while in meditation.
He had bound to a vow the great war god of China, Guan Yunchang, that is, the King of Long Clouds, also known as Guan Laoye, and appointed him a guardian of the teaching.
1️⃣ Of the thirty-two lineage holders, the greatest were: the venerable Zhangan, the venerable Wei of Fahua, Venerable One of Dongyang Tiangong Si (Eastern Sun Heavenly Palace Monastery), the venerable Xuanlang of Zuoqi, and Venerable One of Jingqi.
It seems that after that, the lineage, known as the Tiantai Zong, became gradually more widespread in that part of present-day southern China known as Jiangnan.
Chengguan and the Huayan In northern China, toward Zhongyuan, there was another sect.
1️⃣ Its lineage was transmitted from the father Zhizhe (Great Master Zhiyi) and his spiritual sons through the fivefold spiritual succession of Dashi Di Xin Fashun, Dashi Zhiyan of Yunhua, the Xianshou (Sage Leader) Dashi Fazang, the Guoshi (National Preceptor) Chengguan of Qingliang, and Dashi Zongmi of Guifeng.
1️⃣ It spread extensively through the teaching and study of the Flower Ornament Sutra, so that those five were known as the “five masters of the Sutra of the Ornamented Tree.”
The Guoshi Guan of Qingliang, whose actual name was Chengguan or, in Tibetan, Drimé Sik (Stainless Sight) resided permanently at Five Peaks, so he was known as the Guoshi of Qingliang.
1️⃣ He flourished during the time of Tang Ming Wang (the emperor Xuanzong) (713–55).
There was nothing he did not know in the fields of the ten sciences, governmental administration, and so forth.
He possessed the awakening mind.
Although he had never gone to India, he was the equal of Indian scholars in the Sanskrit language, so he required no assistance in the work of translation.
1️⃣ He was endowed with many of the major and minor marks of a buddha: he was nine cubits, four inches tall; his hands hung below his knees; he had forty teeth; his eyes never blinked; and so forth.
The mere sight of him captivated the minds of everyone, high and low.
1️⃣ In the land of China, he was the Great Pandit, without rival or compare.
In the hymn of praise to Five Peaks composed by my omniscient lama, it says: The great being of eastern China, Who is none other than the protector Ajita, Is the one known by the name of the Guoshi of Qingliang.
1️⃣ He also was reported to be an emanation of Jetsün Mañjughoṣa.
1️⃣ He translated the remainder of the Flower Ornament Sutra and illuminated the Tripiṭaka through his three-volume commentary on the stages of the Flower Ornament Sutra, his one-volume work on the vows, the one-volume work entitled the Mirror Showing the Profound Meaning of the View in the Dharmadhātu, the one-volume work entitled the Treatise on the Mirror-Lamp, the Five Entryways into the Stages of the Path, and so forth.
All in all, he wrote more than three hundred volumes of systematic treatises, which gather the scattered and reveal the hidden.
1️⃣ It is reputed that there never appeared in China a greater expert on the Flower Ornament Sutra than he.
He gave detailed explanations of the Sutra of the Ornamented Tree to the king and his court on two occasions, and he explained the sutras to them many times.
He was esteemed as a lama by seven generations of kings.
He lived to the age of 102.
His mode of instruction on the extensive stages of the path was in terms of five path stages: middling and ordinary persons, preliminaries to the Mahayana, the two actual bases, the sudden approach, and the gradual approach.
This sequence is called the Xianshou system.
Although it seems that the aim of this system and the aforementioned Tiantai system are one and the same, when it comes to the stages for guiding students, the mode of guidance of the former involves the eight entrances, while that of this system involves the five stages, and they maintain their separate lineages based on just that.
1️⃣ Thus, when some Tibetan Dharma histories distinguish the dunmen and jianmen as distinct philosophical systems, this is an error, because it seems that both dunmen and jianmen — that is, sudden entrance and gradual entrance — differ only in their methods for guiding disciples.
It is said that the twenty-first successor to the fifth Sutra of the Ornamented Tree master, You Anpu Taifashi went on a pilgrimage to Five Peaks, where he encountered the holy lord Maitreya, who was actually dwelling there in a miraculous temple. Over the course of a month, he perfectly received Maitreya’s detailed explanation of the five treatises.
Although the southern and northern disciple lineages of those masters were unbroken, the stream of the proper explanation of the Madhyamaka view as presented by father Zhizhe and his spiritual sons apparently did not last long.
1️⃣ The lineage of essential meaning, Chan The lineage of essential meaning: The lineage is as follows: the Teacher, the Blessed One; the ārya Mahākāśyapa; the ārya Ānanda; the arhat Śānavastrī; and the arhat Upagupta.
1️⃣ From Upagupta, it went to the ārya Dhītika and Madhyāhrika.
1️⃣ From Dhītika, it was transmitted to the arhat Kṛṣṇa, and it went from him to Sudarśana and Vibhāga.
1️⃣ From Vibhāga, it went to Buddhānanta; Buddhamitra; Bhikṣu Pārśva; Sunaśada; Aśvabhaka, that is, “He Who Has a Horse’s Voice,” who is not the same as the master Aśvaghoṣa; Amṛta; Nāgārjuna; Āryadeva; Rāhula, who is the same as Rāhulabhadra; Saṅghananti; the bhikṣu-arhat Ghalaśa; Kumārata; Śayata; Vasubandhu; Manota; Hakalikaśa; Bhikṣu Siṃha; Bhaśyasiddha; Viśvamitra; and Prajñādhara.
1️⃣ From Prajñādhara, it was transmitted to Bodhidharmottara, that is, "He Whose Highest Dharma Is Enlightenment," who was the twenty-eighth successor to Kāśyapa.
During that time, the special instruction on the essential meaning was handed over without interruption from one master to another.
This master Bodhidharmottara handed over the teaching to Viśvamitra the Later, then went to China himself.
Initially, he had an audience with the king of the Jiangnan region, Liang Wu Di, Emperor Wu of Liang.
When he was questioned on the Dharma by the king, his ministers, and some scholars, he did not teach according to the text but taught only in enigmatic speech and allegory; they were displeased and took him to be an advocate of nihilistic views.
The master, realizing that it would be purposeless to stay, left there and went north, to the land of Huige.
While he was en route, when he had to cross the great river Jiang, he made his way to the other side by riding on a single reed, without sinking into the water.
A general who was traveling by boat saw this, developed faith, and recounted the story.
The king of the Jiangnan region, his ministers, and others heard it, and repented.
There were also among the Huige many learned Indian and Chinese masters, like master Bodhiruci and others, so that it was a period of extensive teaching and study.
Because master Bodhidharmottara could not find in that country anyone fortunate enough to be able to carry on his legacy, he waited for a while, as if in hiding.
As it happened, a heshang named Huike from the country of Jiangnan heard the life story of the master and, impelled by faith, sought him out and met him.
1️⃣ He and three Huige disciples were the four to whom Bodhidharmottara taught the special instruction on the essential meaning.
The other three had a general understanding of the meaning, but Huike alone encountered the meaning directly, so the master handed over to him the teachings of the essential instruction, and prophesied: Before, when I was crossing the river, there were five leaves on the reed that supported my feet; this omen signifies that the transmission of the word lineage will increase greatly from your fifth successor.
1️⃣ From him, it will divide into five independent schools. Then the master appeared to enter nirvana.
Afterward, some who had come from India said they had met the master on the road returning to India carrying a sandal.
1️⃣ When his disciples, their doubts having been raised, opened the casket containing his remains and looked inside, there was nothing there but a single sandal.
1️⃣ Through a corruption of the Sanskrit dharmo, most people later on called him Damo Zushi (Damo the First Patriarch).
He is depicted in art as crossing the river atop a single reed, bearing a staff on his shoulder to which a single sandal is attached; this seems to be based on the story recounted above.
1️⃣ Some say: “This master is the Indian Pha Dampa; it is widely known that he went to China, and in some teachings of the Shijepa it says that ‘When he assumed the form of the vajra body of Pha Dampa Sangyé, he bore on his shoulder a ceremonial cloth similar to the costume in which Dharmo is depicted.’
It seems there also is a story of Pha Dampa going to India bearing a sandal on his shoulder.”
However, because I have not seen that story recounted in my sources, it is difficult to credit.
In accordance with the prophecy of Master Bodhidharmottara, from Huike to Liuzu Chanshi (Huineng, 638–713) the word instruction was transmitted to five masters; Liuzu Chanshi gave it to many disciples, so it split into five lineages: the Linji lineage, the Caodong lineage, the Yunmen lineage, the Guiyang lineage, and the Fayan lineage.
Of those, the Linji and Caodong lineages have lasted down to the present; the other three have disappeared.
1️⃣ The lineage of the essential meaning is called Zongmen (Gate of Realization).
Its approach seems equivalent to the Tibetan Kagyü, the Mahāmudrā-symbol lineage.
While it seems that the Heshang Mahāyāna who came to Tibet was a follower of the Zongmen, what he taught does not seem to be the same as the standpoint of the general Zongmen view.
1️⃣ The followers of Zongmen teach that, when influenced by neither renunciation nor the awakening mind, virtuous and nonvirtuous actions yield, respectively, happiness and suffering, but neither virtuous nor nonvirtuous actions can become causes of liberation or omniscience.
1️⃣ This is like white clouds and black clouds, which appear distinct but obscure the sky in equal measure.
1️⃣ Failing to make that distinction, Heshang Mahāyāna said that good thoughts and bad thoughts alike produce bondage.
Although the instructions on how to meditate on the Zongmen view say that you should “do nothing and think nothing,” this is for the person who has directly realized the ultimate nature.
1️⃣ Heshang Mahāyāna, on the other hand, said that from the very beginning, you are freed by thinking nothing at all.
Thus, it is inappropriate to regard the views of all heshangs as wrong simply because a flawed system was taught by one.
Summary of India-based traditions Thus, the teaching of the Buddha came down in five lineages or stages; since the time of Gung Yöl of the Tang dynasty, however, it has been reduced to three schools: the Lumen, or vinaya lineage, the Jiaomen, or explanation lineage, and Zongmen, or realization lineage.
2️⃣ This classification into three schools continues to be current.
How Buddhism came from Tibet a. In general Until the Mongol dynasty, no Tibetan holy person had ever gone to China.
1️⃣ At the time of the great Mongol dynasty, Sakya Pandita Künga Gyaltsen, along with his disciple and successor, the world-protecting Dharma king Phakpa, went to China, as did the three Karmapas, Karma Pakshi, Rangjung Dorjé, and Rölpai Dorjé, and the Nyingmapa Yungtön Dorjé Pal.
Although King Yonglé of the Da Ming dynasty invited the conqueror Tsongkhapa, he did not go; Jamchen Chöjé Shākya Yeshé went as his representative.
The Dharma lord Tashi Palden, who was a direct disciple of both Jé Tsongkhapa and the Karmapa, as well as Karmapa Deshin Shekpa and others, went and worked extensively for the teaching in China.
In particular, how the matchless Ganden Mountain tradition spread Although Jamchen Chöjé went to China in the time of King Yonglé and introduced the teaching there, it became very widespread only in the time of the Great Qing.
When the emperor Shizu Huangdi (r. 1644–62) was residing at Mukden, the omniscient Panchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen urged the Great Fifth Dalai Lama: “If you establish a relationship with the present king of Mukden and obtain his patronage, he may help our teaching later on.” The Dalai Lama agreed, and the two conquerors, father and spiritual son, sent an envoy to present a letter along with gifts.
1️⃣ The great emperor was quite delighted and sent to each a direct reply along with generous gifts; that was the beginning of the preceptor-patron relationship.
Not long afterward, when the bandit chief Li Zicheng seized the realm of King Chongzhen, the troops of Emperor Shizu the Great decisively defeated the bandit chief, and he took the empire for himself.
At that time, when the emperor was staying at Mukden, there was a lama-adept who had been dispatched by Panchen Rinpoché to perform religious rituals. He predicted the day, the minute, the hour, and so forth when the empire would be conquered, and the adept himself went with the king to Beijing. After the emperor ascended the golden throne, he constructed a stupa on the top of a mountain called Jing Shan in the center of the capital in order to strengthen his rule.
1️⃣ In front of the stupa, he erected statues of Lhamo and her two attendants, with the faces, and three religious flagpoles.
Nowadays, because their significance is no longer understood, those three flag staffs have been converted into three tall flagpoles in the Chinese style, called qigan. Moreover, behind the outer walls, he constructed the Yellow Temple and its statuary, which guard the kingdom, as it were.
1️⃣ Occasionally, a good-luck ceremony was performed on top of the palace involving the blowing of horn trumpets and circumambulation; this custom has continued down to the present day.
1️⃣ For that reason, the emperor bestowed upon him the rank of Consecrated Seal Lama, which the chief figures in the lineage continue to hold.
Furthermore, the forty-nine banners of the Inner Mongols recognized Neichi Thoyon Hutuqtu as guru.
At his urging, most of the Mongols, principally the Khorchin, submitted to the emperor, as did all the Khalka, on the basis of the activities of the holy lord Losang Tenpai Gyaltsen, who was the rebirth of Jamyang Chöjé.
1️⃣ Because of the valuable service rendered to the empire by those Geluk lamas, the great emperor became an extraordinary patron of our teaching, and he and the Dalai and Panchen Lamas sent envoys back and forth, so that in time the relationship became even deeper.
1️⃣ When the mighty conqueror, the Great Fifth, was invited to the capital, the emperor presented him with a letters patent proclaiming him “Mighty Conqueror of the Field of Supreme Virtue in the Western Quarter, The Master of All the Buddha’s Teachings on Earth, the Omniscient Dalai Lama Vajradhara,” along with a crystal seal.
The Emperor King Dekyi invited the omniscient Changkya Ngawang Losang Chöden and presented him with a golden letter praising him as Da Guoshi, or Great National Preceptor, together with a golden seal.
The preceptor and patron erected several temples in the imperial city and restored the great temple at Seven Lakes, establishing a monastery there.
1️⃣ During the lifetime of that same emperor’s son, Yongzheng the Great, my alleged previous birth, the great being Thuken Ngawang Chökyi Gyatso was enthroned as Seal Lama for having well taught the precepts of the two systems to the yellow-clad lamas of the imperial city, and was presented with a golden letter proclaiming him Jingxiu Chanshi, or Master of Contemplation Possessed of the Pure Teaching, and a seal.
The supreme Changkya emanation body, the omniscient holy lord Rölpai Dorjé, was invited to China when he was just eight years old, and homage beyond imagining was paid to him; not long afterward, he was given the seal of Da Guoshi.
1️⃣ The omniscient Second Panchen, Losang Yeshé, was given letters patent and a seal, and a fiefdom in the region of Tsang.
The Seventh Dalai Lama, the omniscient Kalsang Gyatso, was given letters patent and a crystal seal, as in the time of the Fifth Dalai Lama.
1️⃣ To a multitude of holy men worthy of honor, such as the noble Jamyang Shepai Dorjé, he gave the title of Nomin Han and a seal, and he distributed gifts impartially to the upholders of the Geluk Dharma, regardless of whether they resided in the border or central lands.
1️⃣ His son, the emperor, the great sovereign Qianlong, proclaimed Changkya the omniscient as the Crown of the Human Race, heard many Dharma teachings from him on sutra and mantra, and put them into practice.
He established innumerable temples and instances of the three supports.
In the imperial city, he renovated the temple of Ganden Jinchak Ling and instituted colleges for sutra, mantra, and worldly subjects there; and in the place known as Jehol, he established many different temples and colleges.
1️⃣ Many great, holy men from Tibet and Amdo were invited and granted the title of Samati Pakshi.
1️⃣ I too, who am to be regarded as a pebble is to gold, was given very generous rewards and the seal of Chanshi.
The omniscient Third Panchen, Palden Yeshé, was invited, and the emperor paid him incomparable honor, presented him with letters patent, and heard Dharma teachings from him.
When the Gorkhas of Nepal attacked the teaching and the government in Tibet, troops sent by the emperor defeated them decisively.
A proclamation was issued that the Ganden tradition should be the foremost everywhere under the sun.
Thus, through his gnostic insight, the Panchen, who is the omniscient aspect of Amitābha, discerned that it would be particularly necessary in the future, and so auspiciously inaugurated a relation of preceptor and patron between the Bogdo of the Jurchid and the Gedenpas.
Based on that, the precious teaching of Jé Tsongkhapa, the second conqueror, which is without even the slightest stain of confusion about any of the three — view, meditation, and conduct — with regard to either sutra or mantra, and is the source of benefit and happiness of all people, has flourished like a wishing tree in the land of China, its splendor blazing like the orb of the sun.
1️⃣ Concluding verses Many very powerful great beings, who prayed To uphold the holy Dharma, brought to the land of China From the Dharma treasury of the Holy Land As many precious texts as their own intellectual ability could carry.
1️⃣ And many merchants of the Dharma — scholars and adepts — Rich with the wealth of learning and realization, Bearing the instructions on sutra and mantra, the wealth desired by all, Forged sincerely on, and arrived in this country.
As the treasure of the holy Dharma flourished in that way In the world of converts in the eastern lands, The hand of hope for all beings Was adorned with the glory of the ever-desirable jewel.
1️⃣ From out of the dharmadhātu, so clear, so clear, The beautiful moonlight of the Buddha’s deeds, so deep, so deep, Spontaneously shines everywhere unimpeded Upon the pools of fortunate converts, whoever they may be.
1️⃣ With the brush of intelligence dipped In the colors of the topics of many histories, I have drawn a sketch of this marvelous account As a curiosity for the connoisseur.
From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation the history of the Dharma system of the insiders — the Buddhists — in the land of China.
2️⃣ Central Asian Traditions IV.
1️⃣ The History of Philosophical Systems in Some Other Lands.
3️⃣ I will relate how the Muni’s teaching, the source of benefit and happiness, Came to Great Hor, Khotan, and Shambhala Through the Conqueror’s deeds and, like beautiful music, was performed in harmony with the disciples’ karmic lot.
1️⃣ IN MANY COUNTRIES great and small, such as Kashmir, Nepal, Persia, Campaka, Kiṣkindha, Sermik, Rugma, Ramma, Tāmradvīpa, Siṅgaladvīpa, Priyaṅkudvīpa, Yamunadvīpa, Suvarṇadvīpa, Candradvīpa, Mecca, Kaśya, Kyi Jang, Shangshung, Gilgit, Achai, Sumpa, Sahor, Xixia, Jang, Xinjiang, Tukhara, Uḍḍiyāna, Draviḍa, Longpo, Cola, Kaliṅga, and others, the Dharma spread and declined in various ways due to the degree to which those countries encountered the three vehicles of the Buddhadharma in its entirety, and the differences among the peoples of those lands as ordinary or extraordinary fields for conversion.
1️⃣ To discuss all of that, as well as all of the many varieties of wrong views held in those countries, is beyond my capacity.
Therefore, I will briefly relate here how the Dharma spread in A. Mongolia, B. Khotan, and C. Shambhala.
A. How the teaching spread in Mongolia. 1.
The thirteenth and fourteenth centuries: Sakyapas, Karmapas, and the Yuan a. Genghis Khan’s era There are no historical accounts of Indian scholars, adepts, or others coming to this land and opening the way for the teaching; the Dharma was introduced from Tibet.
The first teaching to arrive was the Dharma system of the Sakyapas.
1️⃣ Genghis Khan, who turned the wheel of power, came to Tibet and brought under his control all three myriarchies of Ngari, the four horns of Ü and Tsang, and Lho, Kham, and Gang.
1️⃣ He sent emissaries to Tsang and through an exchange of gifts and so forth with Sachen Künga Nyingpo, established a preceptor-patron relationship with him.
Subsequently, Genghis invited him to Mongolia and also requested that he bring with him some examples of the three supports.
As a result, all of the Mongols came to have faith in the teaching, which was the beginning of the worship of the Buddha.
1️⃣ Some even took lay and other vows.
1️⃣ This marks the establishment of the teaching among the Mongols.
2️⃣ This event took place in the fire-hare year of the fourth sexegenary cycle.
1️⃣ According to those who maintain that the Buddha’s nirvana occurred in an iron-dragon year, years had passed, and for those who accept that it occurred in a fire-hare year, years.
From that year to the iron-dragon year of the thirteenth sexegenary cycle, years have elapsed.
Godan and Kublai’s era When Genghis’ grandsons, the brothers Guyug and Godan, ruled the kingdom from Lanzhou, Godan, who had heard of the fame of Sakya Panchen, sent an emissary to Tibet with an invitation for him to visit Mongolia, which he accepted.
1️⃣ Sapan did so because it accorded with a prophecy that his predecessor, the venerable Drakpa Gyaltsen, had made to him, that when a man from a borderland wearing a hat like a hawk and shoes like pigs’ snouts would come to invite him there, it would be beneficial to both the teaching and living beings were he to go.
1️⃣ Together with his nephews Phakpa and Chakna, he went and met with King Godan in the fire-sheep year of the fourth sexegenary cycle.
The king, who was stricken with an illness caused by earth demons, was completely cured by Sapan by means of the Lion’s Roar ritual.
Sapan bestowed the Hevajra initiation on the king and his retinue and performed miracles of various kinds, so that they became devotees.
1️⃣ Up to that time the Mongols had no written language.
Sapan, wishing to design an alphabet for them, happened to see a woman holding a wooden hide-rubbing tool that resembled the edge of a saw, and based on its shape he modeled the Mongolian letters: a e i, na ne ni, pa pe pi, ha he hi, gha ghe ghi, ma me mi, la le li, ra re ri, sa se si, ta te ti, tha the thi, tsa tse tsi, tsha tshe tshi, ya ye yi, wa we wi.
Dividing the letters into male, female, and neuter, and tight, loose, and slack, he introduced literacy in Mongolian.
1️⃣ Both Sapan and the king died in the iron-pig year.
1️⃣ As everyone knows, the physical remains of Sapan lie within the stupa of Trüldé (Miraculous Monastery), outside the palace at Lanzhou.
Later on, during the reign of King Mongké, Karma Pakshi and others arrived.
Mongké’s younger brother, Kublai Sechen Khan, greatly expanded Mongol power by bringing under his control all of China, Tibet, Mongolia, and about half of India, as far as the border of Kashmir.
Sapan’s nephew, Phakpa Lodrö Gyaltsen, was invited from Tibet, and he met with the king in the water-ox year.
The king questioned him about the Dharma and so became his devotee.
1️⃣ However, prior to that he had been a devotee of Karma Pakshi and in a private conversation had said, “Phakpa’s knowledge of scripture is the greater, but it appears that when it comes to realization, the bearded lama is far superior.”
The queen, named Dzema Sangmo (Beautiful and Good), was a devotee of Lama Phakpa and secretly reported the king’s remark to him, imploring him to compete with Pakshi in a contest of miracles so that the king might come to have full faith in him. This Phakpa accepted.
1️⃣ According to some accounts, in the presence of the king and others, Pakshi rose cross-legged into the sky and abruptly passed right through a mountain and displayed other feats as well.
1️⃣ Phakpa demonstrated such miracles as severing his own five limbs, scattering them about, turning them into the conquerors belonging to the five families, reuniting them with his own body, and so forth.
According to the Blue Annals: “Kublai met Pakshi and promulgated a gracious decree: ‘You may practice your Dharma in the land of Tibet or wherever you like, and may I be the recipient of your good wishes.’”
1️⃣ This story is found nowhere else.
1️⃣ According to some holy men the so-called Stupa of Karma Li Shi located within the palace of Lanzhou is actually the stupa of Karma Pakshi, which, through a garbled pronunciation, came to be known as the Stupa of Karma Li Shi.
While there is no doubt that Karma Pakshi died in Lanzhou, there are, nevertheless, in the Blue Annals and elsewhere, accounts of his having returned to Tibet.
The king did not ask Phakpa for initiation for some time.
First, he had the queen request the Hevajra initiation.
When he asked her what kind of vows were required and she described them to him, the king said: “While I can keep my other promises, it is impossible for me, a great king, not to transgress the orders of a guru.”
The queen replied that it would be acceptable if the king were to be supreme in worldly matters and the guru supreme in matters of Dharma.
1️⃣ The king found this agreeable, and together with a retinue of who were able to keep the vows, he received the Hevajra initiation.
1️⃣ As the initiation tribute he offered two great golden mandalas, one patterned with flawless pearls the size of sheep droppings piled up in heaps, and the other patterned with Mt. Meru, the continents, and so forth also made of gold, as well as gifts of horses, mules, camels, gold, silver, and silk beyond imagining.
1️⃣ The king also offered him a title that in Chinese is Sanjie Daguoshi, or Dharma King of the Three Realms.
The king gave him the territory around the city of Lixin together with its inhabitants, and later, in stages, all three provinces of Tibet to be his subjects.
1️⃣ When the king said that he was going to decree that all Tibetan monks should follow the Sakya Dharma system, Phakpa Rinpoché replied that it would be best if everyone adhered to their own long-flourishing Dharma systems, and the king established a policy of impartiality as a result.
Phakpa Rinpoché went back to Tibet in the wood-ox year but returned to the land of Hor in the earth-snake year of the fifth sexegenary cycle.
In the iron-horse year, he designed Mongolian seal letters that were square in shape and so established the practice of teaching, study, meditation, and realization; thus did he greatly promote the welfare of the teaching and living beings.
The king, having obtained from India many examples of the three supports, such as buddha relics and so forth, had temples built, established monasteries, and so spread the teaching.
c. Later developments The Dharma, however, could not be translated into Mongolian using the seal letters, so when the Mongols recited the Dharma, they did so in the Uyghur language.
In the time of King Öljeitü, the Sakya teacher Chökyi Öser came to Mongolia and added many letters with tails to the letters previously invented by Sapan and so made it possible to translate the Dharma.
Later, in the time of King Heshan Külüg, the word of the Buddha, such as the five dhāraṇī texts, and other texts and their commentaries were translated into Mongolian.
In the time of Buyantu Khan, Jamyang, a pupil of Narthang Rikral, came to the land of Hor.
While at Narthang he had put on a mask and frightened Rikral so that his lama had become displeased with him; however, he later regained his lama’s favor by sending him from Mongolia much of the equipment necessary for producing a Kangyur, and in particular by offering him a box of the best Chinese ink.
It was owing to the dispatch of the equipment by Jamyang that a Kangyur was produced, and he requested that it be kept in the Mañjughoṣa temple at Narthang.
1️⃣ With that as a model, copies of the Kangyur proliferated.
It is said that some time later, the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorjé, came and initiated a king of Hor who, I think, may have been Jayatu.
1️⃣ Togon Temur invited the Fourth Karmapa, Rölpai Dorjé, who arrived in Mongolia at the age of nineteen, in the earth-male-dog year.
During the time of the fourteen kings from Genghis to Erdeni Chogtu, many Sakya and Karmapa lamas went to Mongolia, and more than a few were honored by the king with the title Dishi.
1️⃣ The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and beyond: Mongol-Geluk relations a. Altan Khan and others How the relationship of preceptor and patron with the Gedenpa came about: During the time of Altan Khan (1557–82) of the Tümed, the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso, came to Mongolia, abolished the practice of the ritual sacrifice of living creatures in the worship of the Ongghot, and introduced the Yellow Hat tradition.
1️⃣ The Third Dalai Lama having died in Mongolia, his incarnation, the Fourth Dalai Lama Yönten Gyatso, was born in Mongolia [in 1589], which was beneficial to the wide diffusion of the teaching, especially in Mongolia.
All the Mongols became patrons of the Gedenpa.
Subsequently, Shirgetu (fl. early seventeenth century) translated the three mothers into Mongolian.
In the time of the Chahar Ligden (d. 1634) many translators, under the direction of Künga Öser, translated the entire Kangyur into Mongolian.
Ligden, the last minor king of Hor, destroyed his very own kingdom in a civil war, and the Hor dynasty came to an end.
During the time of the emperor Kangxi (1661–1722), the Mongolian-letter Kangyur was corrected and printed.
By order of the Mañjughoṣa Emperor Qianlong (1711–99), the entire Tengyur was translated into Mongolian and printed.
During that time, Changkya Rölpai Dorjé wrote the Dictionary: A Sourcebook for the Wise, which was indispensable for translating the Dharma into Mongolian and was, for later translators, the eye for viewing the meaning of scriptural terminology.
1️⃣ When Sönam Gyatso was traveling to the land of Sog for the second time, King Taiji Abadai (1554–88) met him in Khalkha territory [in 1587].
1️⃣ The king built the temple of Erdeni Juu.
1️⃣ The First Jetsün Dampa Losang Tenpai Gyaltsen, the rebirth of Tāranātha, was born as the son of Abadai’s grandson Dorjé Tushetu Khan (1594–1655).
1️⃣ Jetsün Dampa became the crown jewel of all seven sections of the Khalkha.
1️⃣ Even the great Mañjughoṣa Emperor greatly esteemed him and praised him.
1️⃣ Jetsün Dampa established the monastery of Riwo Gegyé Ling.
1️⃣ From that time on the rebirths have proceeded in succession.
In addition, both Jaya Pandita Losang Trinlé, who had been a pupil of both Panchen Losang Chögyen and the Fifth Dalai Lama, and Erdeni Pandita Losang Tenzin founded monasteries and promoted the teaching widely.
Ever since then, the land of the Khalkha has been filled with holy men and monasteries, and instruction in both teaching and practice has flourished.
1️⃣ Döndrup Gyatso, the head teacher of Gomang, who was famous for being a bodhisattva on the path of preparation, came to the land of the Torgod and introduced the teaching; however as the Torgod came under the control of Russia the teaching did not make much progress.
1️⃣ Later, when the Torgod emerged from Russian control and were put under the control of the Mañjughoṣa Emperor, the emperor divided the territory up among the various chiefs who settled there, and the Torgod zealously applied themselves to the veneration and support of the precious teaching.
When, from among the four sections that make up the Oirat or Ölöt, the Khoshot were in power, Galdan Boshugtu Khan of the Choros clan grew in strength and wealth, overthrew the Khoshot Ocirtu Sechen Khan, and brought the entire realm of the Oirat under his control.
He established many colleges for instruction in the sutras and tantras.
After him, Erdeni Jorigtu Hong Taiji Tsewang Rabten came to have strong faith in the Conqueror’s teaching in general, and in the doctrine of Geden in particular.
1️⃣ From Tashi Lhünpo he invited in turn the great tantric master Gelek Rapgyé and Paljor Gyatso.
1️⃣ Later, he invited many scholars from Drepung, such as Washül Tenpa Rapgyé and others.
1️⃣ He encouraged the taking of one-day vows by householders and had the novices and monks adhere to the two texts by Tsongkhapa on Training According to the Namtsé Ding Tradition; in this way the purity of the rules of discipline was established.
Although he founded no colleges for the study of dialectics, he did focus upon promoting the teaching and study of The Great and Small Stages of the Path.
In his respect for the teaching, he was the equal of the Tibetan king Tri Ralpachen, as shown by such deeds as giving every novice and monk a gift of three households to support him, six camels, forty cows and horses, and two hundred sheep.
1️⃣ After him, his son Ganden Tsering Wangpo invited many who possessed the eye of Dharma: from Tashi Lhünpo the head teacher of Thösam Ling college, the renowned and accomplished great scholar the Third Panchen Palden Yeshé; from Drepung the venerable vinaya master and head teacher of Gomang college, Losang Phüntsok, and the high official Gendün Drakpa; from Sera, the head teacher of Jé college; and others.
1️⃣ Ganden Tsering instituted the teaching and study of dialectics, built many temples, and furnished many material supports of the Buddha’s body, speech, and mind.
1️⃣ Through rich rewards and praise for each newly graduated class of geshés, the pure way of the teaching flourished for quite some time.
1️⃣ However, the kingdom was later on destroyed by civil war, so that today it is barren like fields in autumn.
From among the four sections that make up the Oirat, the third son of the Khoshot chief Ha-nai Noyan, Gushri Khan, known as Tenzin Chökyi Gyalpo was born in the water-male-horse year.
1️⃣ His given name was Thorol Baihur.
According to a prophecy by the treasure revealer Drimé Lhünpo, he was an emanation of Vajrapāṇi; he was a stage-abiding bodhisattva who appeared in the form of a righteous king.
When he was thirteen years old, he led his troops and fell upon an army of ten thousand Gokar, crushing the entire opposing force. From that battle he acquired a reputation for military prowess.
At that time the Dharma had not yet spread into his country.
1️⃣ As everyone knows, when someone remarked to him that the holy Dharma had spread in other Mongol lands owing to the kindness of the pair — the preceptor, the Dalai Lama Sönam Gyatso and the patron, the Golden King, immediately upon hearing that single word Dharma he gained great faith, and he prostrated so many times in the direction of those lands that his forehead swelled up.
When he was twenty-five his mother died, and as part of her funeral rites he lavishly gave alms to the poor.
1️⃣ Meanwhile, owing to a disagreement, there had been a battle between the Khalkha and the Oirat.
Moved by compassion, he went without hesitation among the Khalkha and brought about a reconciliation between the two parties.
1️⃣ For that, Lama Tongkhor Chöjé and the Khalkha king and ministers were overjoyed and gave him the title of Da Guoshi (Great National Preceptor).
He then returned to his own country.
During one of his journeys to Mongolia, the Third Dalai Lama, Sönam Gyatso, was asked by a man from the Oirat to lay his hands on a copy of the Holy Golden Light Sutra.
1️⃣ When the Dalai Lama asked him its Mongolian title and the man replied, Altan Gerel (Golden Light), the Dalai Lama prophesied that in twenty years time the Dharma would spread to his country.
In accordance with that prophecy, with Gushri Khan as patron, many scriptures such as the Holy Golden Light Sutra were translated, and the way of the teaching was established.
Due to the turmoil provoked by the king of the Chahar among the six great divisions of the western Mongols, some of the chiefs fled to the Khalkha, but because of internal dissension among the Khalkha chiefs themselves, the Khalkha Chogtu was driven out of his own country and went to Kokonor, where he brought all of Amdo under his control.
1️⃣ For a while his power was great, and he inflicted as much damage as he could on the teaching in general and on the teaching of Mount Geden in particular. The news of these events reached the king.
1️⃣ With the teaching of Jé Rinpoché as his sole concern, he left his country with a large army and, in the first month of the fire-ox year, arrived in Kokonor, where in battle he utterly destroyed Chogtu’s forty thousand troops and so brought every part of eastern Tibet under his control.
He then went to Ü to meet with the conqueror father and son.
He had an audience with the Great Fifth Dalai Lama and Panchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen and took them as his crown-of-the-head ornaments.
1️⃣ Although it was nighttime on the twenty-seventh day of the lunar month when he went to Ganden for his audience, the assembly hall was so bright that even small stones were visible; thus the omens concurred that all religious and secular government would be white and smooth.
1️⃣ He then returned to Kokonor in the winter of the fire ox-year.
In middle Kham, King Dönyö of Beri was extremely hostile to the teaching of the Buddha and honored the Bön tradition exclusively.
Learning of this, in the fifth Hor month of the earth-hare year, Gushri Khan with a huge army fell upon Beri and made most of them his subjects.
The King of Beri fled elsewhere but was captured on the twenty-fifth day of the eleventh month of the iron-dragon year and imprisoned. All the lamas and chiefs of the Sakyapas, Gelukpas, Karmapas, Drukpas, Taklungpas, and others who had been incarcerated were released and sent back to their original places.
1️⃣ The people of every land, up to those of the king of Sa Dam in Jang, paid their taxes and earnestly rendered him homage.
2️⃣ At that time the ruler of Ü-Tsang was the regent Tsangpa, who patronized the Karmapas primarily and plotted actively against the Gelukpas.
1️⃣ Gushri Khan, with a mighty army, invaded Ü-Tsang and destroyed the forces of Tsangpa.
1️⃣ He captured the ruler Tsangpa and his ministers, imprisoned them at Neu Shikha in Ü, brought all of Ü-Tsang under his control, and became king of the three provinces of Tibet.
1️⃣ The white umbrella of his law extended to the pinnacle of the cosmos.
1️⃣ He eliminated all wicked persons challenging the Gelukpas.
In addition, many lesser kings from the border regions, such as the Indian king Raghu Singh, the king of Kathmandu in Nepal, the king of Ngari, and others offered him gifts according to the custom of their countries.
1️⃣ Gushri Khan offered the subjects of Ü-Tsang to the omniscient Dalai Lama.
The majesty of the heaven-appointed political administration of the Ganden Palace reached to the sky.
It is understood that the reputation that Ganden enjoys to this day as Heavenly Ganden is due to the kindness of this king.
This king had ten sons, from among whom Dayan Khan and, in turn, his grandson Lhapsang Khan became kings of Tibet.
Gushri Khan’s youngest son, A Khu Tashi Batur, became king of Kokonor.
1️⃣ Thus, the line of Gushri Khan split among separate independent princes who were powerful and rich and able to stand on their own without relying on others.
1️⃣ However, they all later came under the control of the Mañjughoṣa Emperor as a result of the war initiated by Tenzin Wang.
1️⃣ The emperor restored them to their respective fiefdoms and presented them with gifts, and in accordance with the custom of their ancestors, the princes enthusiastically worked for the Dharma, honoring and supporting the teaching of Ganden and its upholders by building monasteries in their territories and so forth.
1️⃣ Thus did the teaching spread through the various lands of the Sog.
Over the course of time it became customary for Mongolian monks to go to Ü and Tsang for their education, so that many of them, having received a standard Tibetan education, were able to uphold and further the Dharma in various ways through teaching and practice.
1️⃣ In addition, holy great men came time and time again — from Ü-Tsang, Eastern Tibet, and elsewhere — so that at present the entire land of Hor is filled with temples and monasteries.
Schools of dialectics have spread, and as a result the precious teaching has spread and flourished.
Apart from some places such as Solon and Barga, even the names of the debased views of the infidels and barbarians are unknown in the vast land of Sog.
At present, even upholders of the earlier Dharma lineages of the Sakya and Karmapa are not to be found; the Yellow Hat tradition alone fills the land.
1️⃣ How the teaching spread in Khotan As prophesied by the Blessed One in such sutras as the Liyül Prophecy and Langru Prophecy, in Khotan, years after the passing of the Buddha, Vaiśrāvaṇa gave to the king of China a boy named Kustana, who had been born to Vaiśrāvaṇa and a queen of the Dharma king Aśoka.
1️⃣ Kustana, who had gone on an expedition with ten thousand troops, and Dharmarāja Aśoka’s minister Yaśa and his retinue of seven thousand, who had been exiled by king Aśoka, converged in Khotan and took over the land.
1️⃣ In the time of Vijayasaṃbhava of the Yaśa lineage, who was an emanation of Maitreya, Mañjughoṣa emanated as the bhikṣu Vairocana and created and taught the Khotanese alphabet.
1️⃣ King Vijayasaṃbhava built the temple of Tsārma.
Many people wanted to establish temples and stupas, so they built temples and stupas for as many relics of the Buddha as there were.
At the urging of the king, the bhikṣu Vairocana invited elders, and they were worshipped and honored.
Then, at the time of the seventh in the Khotanese royal line, Vijayavīrya, four arhats came from India.
The Kāśyapa stupa, which had been prophesied by the Teacher, and the Gaotoshan temple were erected on top of Ox-Head Mountain.
1️⃣ A prince took preliminary ordination and obtained arhatship.
From then on, the teaching of the Buddha spread widely in that land; there were multiple Dharma kings, who established many temples and stupas.
How the teaching spread in the land of Shambhala Overview How the teaching spread in Shambhala: The Kālacakra teaching arose there during the Buddha’s lifetime, has existed there until the present day, and will also be widespread there in the future.
Shambhala is said to be known thus because it was controlled by the so-called Shambhaka clan of the Śākyas.
It also is said that Shambhala means “Held by Śambhū”; Śambhū is a name for Īśvara, and the land he controls is Shambhala.
As to the layout of the land: Its shape is circular; it has the shape of an eight-petaled lotus inside an encircling border of snow mountains.
The interstices of the petal shapes are cut by rivers, and at the center sits a great pistil-like snow mountain.
1️⃣ Each petal contains million cities, so there are million cities all together.
Each set of million cities has million districts, and each set of million cities is ruled by a governor.
In the center of that land is an area like the four continents divided by snow mountains, and in the center of that is Kalāpa city.
To the south of that, in the Malaya garden, is the great three-dimensional Kālacakra mandala constructed by the Dharma king Sucandra; to the east is Upamānsara Lake; to the west is Puṇḍarīka Lake; and to the north is the great palace that was the residence of Dharma kings and kalkins.
The first king to rule there is said to have been Sūryaprabhā.
Then came seven Dharma kings and twenty-five kalkins.
1️⃣ According to the Kālacakra Root Tantra: Sucandra, Sureśvara, and Tejin, Somadatta and Sureśvara, Viśvamūrti and Sureśāna.
1️⃣ Those are the seven Dharma kings.
1️⃣ And: The kalkin Mañjughoṣa Yaśas, the first of the clan, Thence the kalkin Puṇḍarīka, The kalkin Bhadra, who was third, Likewise, the fourth, Vijaya, Sumitrabhadra, Ratnapāṇi, The seventh, Viṣṇugupta, Sūryakīrti and Subhadra, Samudravijaya, Aja, And the kalkin Sūrya, the twelfth, Viśvarūpa and Śaṣiprabha, Ananta and then Mahīpala, Śrīpala, Siṃha, Vikrama, Mahābala, and Aniruddha, Narasiṃha, Maheśvara, The kalkin Ananatavijaya, And again the kalkin Yaśas — As Ananatavijaya’s son, the great wheel holder, The kalkin Rudra — all these will come.
1️⃣ Those are the twenty-five kalkins.
1️⃣ History of the Buddha’s teaching.
The Blessed One awakened to complete enlightenment in the water-horse year called “the various”. A year later, on the full moon of Caitra in the water-sheep year called “the sun,” he taught the perfection of wisdom sutras on Vulture Peak and simultaneously at Śrī Dhānyakaṭaka assumed the form of the main deity of the mandala, Kālacakra, who projected, in the lower section of the stupa, the mandala of the twelve-part ultimate truth, Dharmadhātu Vageśvara, and in the upper section, the glorious sixteen-part astrological mandala.
1️⃣ With the Dharma king Sucandra at their head, the ninety-six emanated Dharma kings of northern Kalāpa, as well as innumerable pure courtiers, were initiated into the great Vajradhātu mandala and were taught the Kālacakra Root Tantra.
1️⃣ The Dharma king Sucandra wrote out the root tantra in book form; having taken it to Shambhala, he erected a three-dimensional Kālacakra mandala and wrote a twelve-thousand-verse commentary on the tantra.
Six hundred years later, the first kalkin, Mañjughoṣa Yaśas, came and taught the root tantra for a hundred years.
1️⃣ And, especially for the purpose of maturing the seer Sūryaratha and others, he taught the Condensed Kālacakra Tantra.
1️⃣ Because he brought the castes into a single caste, he took the name kalkin, or “caste leader.”
1️⃣ After that, the kalkin Puṇḍarīka ascended the throne; he taught the root tantra and condensed tantra for a hundred years and wrote the great commentary called Stainless Light.
Eventually, the great pandit Cilupa, Kālacakrapāda the Elder, and others spread the Kālacakra from Shambhala to the Holy Land of India.
Twenty-five translators who came over time spread the teaching of the Kālacakra in the land of Tibet — the glorious Bhadrabodhi, Dro Lotsāwa Sherap Drak, and others.
1️⃣ At the present time, the nineteenth kalkin, Vikrama, reigns in Shambhala, and this iron-year called “the fierce,” is the seventy-fifth year since that kalkin assumed the throne.
1️⃣ The future The fire-sky-ocean era began in the wood-monkey year called “freeing the sun,” during the reign of the tenth kalkin, Samudravijaya.
3️⃣ In the land of Mecca dwelt the barbarian teachers and their retinues: Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, the White-Clad One, Muhammad, and the Mahdi.
1️⃣ The seventh of those, called Ngarden or Drangtsi Lodrö, that is, Muhammad, composed the astrological texts used by the extremists and spread the barbarian teaching.
1️⃣ At that time, the extremists also adopted the barbarian teaching, so they destroyed many Buddhist temples.
1️⃣ As for a rough calculation of the duration of the barbarian era: it is explained that it will last for years after the Hijra.
About years after this present iron-year, in the fire-sheep year of the twenty-second cycle, called “the ape,” the twenty-fifth kalkin, Raudracakrin, will occupy the Shambhala throne and teach the Dharma.
After about fifty years, half the abhidharma texts of the sutra-vehicle portion of Buddha’s teaching will have disappeared. Toward the end of the Kali Yuga, the last of the four ages described in the mantra texts, starting in the fire-monkey year called “ugly face,” a barbarian king who is the emanation of a titan will appear with his massed vassals and army at a place called Delhi in the western part of the Holy Land; he will subjugate the lands south of the Śītā River: Madhyadeśa together with the region of Tibet.
2️⃣ Having taken control of about half of Jambudvīpa, he will commence to wage war on Shambhala.
At that time, according to the Kālacakra Root Tantra: The kalkin Rudra will arise And put an end to the barbarian religion Through the concentration called the supreme steed of the lord of speech.
1️⃣ As stated there, the twenty-fifth kalkin, Raudracakrin, who is an emanation of Mañjughoṣa, will annihilate those barbarians.
The way that will happen is that that kalkin will come to Jambudvīpa from Shambhala to subdue the barbarians with million horses with the strength of the wind, elephants, chariots, and an army of soldiers extending as far as the eye can see, and will fight a battle with the barbarians on the banks of the Indian river called the Śītā.
At that time, Raudracakrin will pierce the barbarian king Muhammad with his spear, and the kalkin’s two generals, Hanuman and Rudra, will in turn pierce the barbarian generals, Mahācandratanaya and Indranātha, with their spears and defeat them.
On this occasion, all the gods will take the side of the kalkin, and the titans will take the side of the barbarians.
Thus, having utterly destroyed the host of barbarians in combat, the kalkin will have control over the whole expanse of the earth.
The Mahayana Dharma will spread extensively, and because of that, people’s lifespans will increase to years, and they will enjoy the splendor of an unprecedented perfect age.
1️⃣ This is just a brief account; further details may be learned from Khedrup Jé’s Great Commentary on Kālacakra and other sources.
Distinguishing barbarians from extremists Barbarians and the extremists are not the same: there were extremists in Shambhala before the barbarians entered, and it is explained that their standpoint agreed with that of the Indian extremists, and that there were also some who were a bit different from the Indian extremists.
1️⃣ I have not elaborated here on the way they expound their standpoint or the reasoning refuting those debased views, which are taught in the Kālacakra; those wanting more information should look into the tantric commentaries.
The system of the barbarians, unlike that of most extremists, is not based on logic, meditative equipoise, and so forth. Like worldly human conduct, it apparently is a system founded on confusion, clinging, and ego-fixation; it seems that it mainly propounds harming others as Dharma.
It seems that nowadays, in China and other lands, there also are types of barbarians called Houzi and Thaendru.
1️⃣ There are many others like them, and I have heard it said by holy people that the barbarian clans gradually will expand in different directions, and that in the future, when all the great barbarian armies assemble in the Delhi region, they will join forces and will gain control of about half of Jambudvīpa.
1️⃣ Secret prophecies The secret teaching of the omniscient Third Panchen, Palden Yeshé, states: At the present time, not just the Kālacakra, but all the teachings of sutra and mantra are flourishing in Shambhala; even the well-expounded texts of Jé Tsongkhapa, the second conqueror, were magically brought to Shambhala by ḍākas and ḍākinīs and are widespread there.
1️⃣ I also have heard prophecies, seen in pure visions by authoritative persons, to the effect that when the kalkin Raudracakrin has annihilated the barbarians and the teaching of the Buddha is flourishing, the body and head and other limbs of the past glorious protector, Ārya Nāgārjuna — which had been separated and came to rest in different places — will gradually draw closer together.
1️⃣ At that time, the parts will reintegrate, and Nāgārjuna will live again.
Also at that time, the wish-fulfilling jewel, the remains of Jé Lama, will be taken to India by a master, and Jé Lama will live again. Those two once more will perform greatly extensive deeds on behalf of the teaching.
1️⃣ The kalkin Raudracakrin will be an emanation of the First Panchen, the original Buddha, Losang Chögyen: I pray to the wheel-turning king Raudracakrin, who in the future Will destroy the forces of the dark, demonic barbarians; He is the ornament beautifying the aim of the noble-minded Dharma Of Tsongkhapa, who is an emanation of Mañjuśrīvajra.
1️⃣ General Hanuman will be an emanation of the Seventh Dalai Lama, Sumatikalpabhadrasamudra, or Losang Kalsang Gyatso.
1️⃣ A prayer in his Secret Biography says: In the future, in order to destroy the barbarian forces, Let virtue and goodness be bestowed on the whole of Jambudvīpa Through the appearance of the one with splendid, inexhaustible Vajra weapons: the ruler of the twelve lords.
1️⃣ And, as already discussed in my Biographical Ornament Beautifying the Geden Doctrine, as shown in the secret prophecy of Panchen Śrīmajjñāna, that is, Palden Yeshé, General Rudra will be an emanation of my own guide, Jñānaśasanasyadīpiśrībhadra, that is, Changkya Rölpai Dorjé.
Concluding verses Although the lotus’s friend i.e., the moon is high in the sphere of the sky, Its radiant light falls on all the earth; likewise, Although the friend of the sun i.e., the Buddha came to the center of Jambudvīpa, His holy Dharma spread widely, throughout the world.
In Khotan, moistened by the prophetic rain That came from the cloud of the Mighty Muni’s mouth, The golden grain-cluster of the holy Dharma bowed down Atop of the ripening sprout of the merits of embodied beings.
The Mongol lands have been ruled by many lion men, Endowed with mighty shoulders of potent faith That can carry the Dharma throne of the Buddha’s teaching; Nowadays these lands contain as well the glory and wealth of the Land of Snows.
1️⃣ The great rain of the kalkin Rudra’s army Will wash away all stains of debased views, as rain cleanses the earth; Sweet as well is this summer thunder of prophecy That reveals the smile of a new perfected age.
1️⃣ The great sunlight of the Conqueror’s teaching Opens the lotus of auspiciousness; I have spoken briefly of its marvelous rise In Mongolia, Khotan, and Shambhala.
From The Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems, this completes the explanation of the history of philosophical systems in some other lands.
1️⃣ Conclusion V. Conclusion THE FIFTH TOPIC of the basic outline, concluding by an explanation of the final outcome, I will discuss in metered verse.
In the beginning, in the golden ground of his mental continuum, the Buddha planted the stable root of the virtuous arousal of the awakening mind; In the middle, through the power of that, he drank for many eons the streaming water of the two virtuous collections; At the end, by growing and developing it in such a way, he completed the creation of the tree of virtuous enlightenment.
1️⃣ And so, through constant virtue, the cool shade of deeds that take away the torments of existence, the power of the Muni, protects beings completely.
1️⃣ The Kailash of his gnostic understanding Is struck by the solar heat of great kindness, So the streaming rivers of the 84,000 Dharmas Pour down into the fields of converts.
The swirling waters of the purifying Tripiṭaka, Containing the essence of the jewels of the three trainings, When moving in waves of explanation and practice Are called “the great ocean of the Muni’s teaching.”
1️⃣ In that very ocean of scripture and reasoning, the blazing, brilliant light of the jewels of excellent explanation, raised high by the nāga kings, illuminates the ultimate nature of what is to be adopted and abandoned, destroying all the submerged darkness of debased views.
1️⃣ The assembled nāga potentates, upholders of the teaching who are expert at bringing down the rain of longed-for goodness, hold as their own the precious treasure of good qualities that, in every world, protects all the fortunate minor nāgas.
The lotus pond of pure morality has become the playground of a flock of swans, who sound a song of the deep, extensive Dharma, diligent in the vows that pacify conduct and subdue the senses.
2️⃣ The source of precious things, the oceanic teaching of the Muni, fills the center, borderlands, and everywhere; it surges up and overflows, descending to the land outside the rim of snowy peaks.
1️⃣ Drawn down to the valleys of differing inclinations, that water swirls into the many philosophical-system ponds beautified by the lotuses of explanation and practice.
1️⃣ Although it came in a single purifying stream from Kailash, the Mighty Muni, it became unfit to drink, polluted by the brine of certain persons' fantasies.
1️⃣ At that time, Mañjughoṣa, performing as a human, cleansed away the stains of sullied impurity with the ketaka stone of Losang the conqueror's discernment, turning the way of Dharma into the nature of nectar.
1️⃣ Hey, there! Here is what the wise should do, in thought and action: seek a way, a means of liberation from samsara, whose nature is suffering.
Those who never ponder that way, content merely with the appearances of this life, appear to be incarnate humans but ought to be counted as cattle.
Further, there are two schools, the non-Buddhist and the Buddhist, who set forth explanations of bondage and freedom in this world; whichever one you follow, first analyze the distinction between the deceptive and the nondeceptive.
1️⃣ You allow yourself to weigh incessantly, In each and every tiny endeavor of this life, “Although complete, less benefit, Although incomplete, less harm.”
2️⃣ How then could it be right to act so rashly, Not analyzing what to adopt or abandon, When being right means eternal satisfaction And being wrong brings grave disaster?
1️⃣ So, when you know the standpoint Of the non-Buddhist extremists, And see how that system is destroyed By valid knowledge, you can reject it like poison.
1️⃣ And when you establish reliably, Through reasoning based on the way things are, The ways in which we enter or leave samsara, As taught by our Teacher, You will gain certainty that this teaching alone Is the supreme entryway for those desiring liberation And that this very teacher is an undeceiving Authoritative being.
Another teaching or teacher You will not seek, even for the sake of your life.
1️⃣ You will not abandon the Three Jewels; Held in your heart as eternal objects of refuge They are the basis for fulfilling every goal.
Likewise, in this land of Tibet as well, The various philosophical systems of the Dharma schools Are like the designs on Chinese silk — With elements both different and alike.
1️⃣ To understand distinctly the mode Of presentation of view, meditation, and conduct In those philosophical systems, you need to distinguish, Using scripture and logic, what is true from what is fake.
1️⃣ Some are under the sway of partiality, Some act only from obstinate ignorance, Others meditate on everything as pure appearance: Mostly, the Dharma goes unanalyzed.
1️⃣ The system of the wise is not like that.
1️⃣ Giving up taking sides, they search out With an honest mind the distinctions between Errant and inerrant, superior and inferior.
1️⃣ When you take the Conqueror’s scriptures as witness And analyze with reasoning based on the way things are, Then faith derived from understanding reasons will arise Toward the system of Losang the conqueror.
Otherwise, praising their own side And denigrating the other side out of partiality alone, Those who proudly claim to evaluate the teaching Simply disgust the wise.
Among as many scriptures of the Conqueror as there are, There is not even a single thing That is unavailing at the time of practice For those who are intent on liberation.
1️⃣ Although the Buddha taught various provisional and definitive scriptures, They all come down to a single ultimate meaning; Although he taught different vehicles, They all incline toward the ultimate one, the Mahayana.
1️⃣ Therefore, from the Stanzas on Vinaya Up to the Guhyasamāja, everything extant In the scriptural tradition is a necessary condition For one person to become a buddha.
1️⃣ Thus, the fortunate desiring liberation, Unsatisfied with rough or partial understanding, Pursue studies that go to the essential points In untold textual systems.
1️⃣ Because the point of study is to accomplish goals, Do not take a solely external view; Focus on a method that establishes How to practice by way of meditation.
If you do not obtain your own allotted share Of the banquet of secret mantra, the Vajrayana, Which is rarer even than a buddha’s arising, That’s an opportunity for this teaching missed.
1️⃣ By learning and practicing Just a small deity sādhana, You will not cover the distance to enlightenment; So it’s vital that the tantras’ meaning appear as instruction.
After obtaining initiation and abiding in the pledges, The way to advance to the stage of Vajradhara Is the path-traversing system of the two tantric stages And the stages of yogic achievement ensuing from those.
Well understanding the stages taught in the tantras, The yogin who practices those exactly right Is called a secret-mantra yogin By sages who see the mantra way.
1️⃣ The fortunate one who has brought into experience The Dharma to be practiced in that way Will not waste a human life distracted By the spectacle of this realm of appearances.
1️⃣ Living in satisfaction with few desires In a solitary place praised by the Conqueror, Practicing the union of sutra and mantra: That’s how life and practice are equalized.
1️⃣ Thus, precise study, reflection, and meditation on the key points of the complete teaching of the Conqueror: This is the intention of Losang the conqueror; It’s the excellent path traveled by the conquerors of the three times.
Weary of a way such as this, you may hope for immediate freedom merely through identifying the mind; but that’s just making your own head spin.
1️⃣ This conclusion of my discussion of the necessity for understanding philosophical systems and the history of philosophical systems should be taken to heart by those desiring attainment.
1️⃣ In terms of concluding through an explanation of the final outcome, that’s it!
Furthermore, I say: Everywhere in this world, when lovely lines of bright white light-waves descend from the milk-ocean moon orb, the seas, replete with water, are made fortunate by the addition of twinkling starlight and the mass of laughing moonflowers.
1️⃣ Likewise, too, this undefiled account, which discusses the teaching, upholders of the teaching, and the history of philosophical systems, brings good fortune to oneself and others.
1️⃣ Many, however, are the styles of debased view that pave the way to samsara’s edge, and many, too, the stairways of philosophical systems that lead to the doorway of the 84,000 Dharmas in the fine house of the Muni’s teaching.
1️⃣ If discussing those styles of debased view completely fatigues the intelligence of even the highest sages, for someone like me to speak is ridiculous!
Thus, though a child who would swim to the sea’s far shore will not get far, the dark clouds drink the ocean’s essence and spit it out as rain.
1️⃣ Just so, though the real nature of our own and others’ complex philosophical systems are not within the compass of my mind, who would reprove me for putting into writing what I have partially seen and heard?
Therefore, in order to arouse amazement in the hearts of those with the clear eye of wisdom, and to multiply my own merits, I took pains to strive in this way.
1️⃣ Were I to write in detail, this would become a massive tome, with far too many words.
If it were a massive tome, people seeking the proper view would get discouraged just seeing it.
1️⃣ If they got discouraged, the book would lie neglected on a dusty shelf in a dark recess of the house.
1️⃣ Rather than write a treatise that will lie neglected, it’s better this old man should lie neglected.
1️⃣ Therefore, though not prolific in foliage of words, This account — which bundles together twigs of sandalwood That sprout many flowers of essential meaning — Springs up just inside the mental fence of the less intelligent.
May the merits of my striving here become A mighty, royal wish-fulfilling jewel that piles up Clouds of Samantabhadra’s offerings in the conquerors’ fields And fulfills the hopes of beings in all the worlds.
May the victory banner of the teaching, Beautified by the crown jewel of the three trainings And trimmed with the ribbons of the Tripiṭaka, Be raised in every direction and never list.
1️⃣ In particular, may this stainless tradition Of sutra and mantra of Losang the second conqueror, The supreme essence of the Muni’s teaching, Be triumphant until the end of existence.
May the upholders of the teaching have long lives and their wholesome deeds extend in the ten directions.
May the various classes of sangha exert themselves in explanation and practice, with minds harmonious and morals always pure.
May every ruler have faith in the teaching and guard their dominions according to Dharma, without contention.
May beings enter the path of the ten virtues and proceed to the city of liberation.
May I, too, in all my lives, gain leisure and fortune, And be cared for by perfect virtuous friends.
Through study, reflection, and meditation, and through teaching, debate, and composition, May I uphold the teaching of Losang the conqueror and augment it.
With the incomparable courage to bear alone The burden of the great waves of deeds of the conquerors and their children; May I, like Mañjughoṣa, be the ally and friend Of beings infinite as space, as long as existence continues.
1️⃣ I confess to the supreme refuges the entirety of the mass of contradictions, errors, and mistakes due to childish faults in this account describing the history of the philosophical systems.
1️⃣ By your merciful compassion, please purify my flaws.
All those who provide sponsorship for the writing, printing, and so forth of this account, and who read and reflect upon it: through all their lives may they not be separate from the pure path praised by the conquerors.
1️⃣ The compassion of the Three Jewels, just like the rays of the sun, extends equally to all.
1️⃣ The deeds of the Dharma protectors, like the ocean tide, are never untimely.
By the force of dependent arising, as by the wish-granting tree, all desirable things are yielded up: by the power of these truths, may what I have hoped for come to pass.
Colophon This Crystal Mirror: An Excellent Explanation Showing the Sources and Assertions of All Philosophical Systems: Könchok Tenpai Drönmé — the holy scholar-adept who controls all desirable things through his independent discernment of all the untold textual systems, and who is the reincarnation of Gungthangpa Gendün Phüntsok, who in turn was the spiritual heir of the crown ornament of all the scholar-adepts, the omniscient lama Jamyang Shepa — offered a silver mandala and divine silk cloth, ardently exhorting me, “Write such a book.”
Likewise, Lharampa Yeshé Döndrup, the throne holder of Thumé Peisi Monastery and reciter of a hundred texts, exhorted me repeatedly by letter.
1️⃣ Moreover, I also undertook this because of the requests of a multitude of intelligent monks from the great monastery of Gönlung Jampa Ling, such as the logician Ouhan Kachu Yönten Palsang, Trensin Kachu Tenzin Gyatso, and others.
1️⃣ When the writing was about half finished, the unrivaled and matchless Rongpo Bipa trulku, Ngawang Mipham Dawa, saw it and, presenting a long silk scarf, exhorted me, “Please bring the book all the way to its conclusion.”
Because of that, and through the kindness of my holy tutors, numbering more than thirty, on the dust of whose feet I place my head — including the holder of the vajra of definitive meaning, the omniscient Changkya Rinpoché, Rölpai Dorjé; the lord of the complete teaching of the Muni, if I may say his name, my precious preceptor, the holy Phurbu Chok Ngawang Jampa; the great wheel turner of the holy Dharma, Mañjughoṣa Könchok Jikmé Wangpo; the pervasive lord, the great Takphupa, Hasavajra Shap; the lord of the ocean of the three trainings and all the sciences, Paṇḍita Jñānaśrībhuti Sumpa Khenpo Yeshé Paljor; and others — I, who am called Losang Chökyi Nyima, a lazy man in the form of a monk whose confidence in his own intelligence is not too low to give an account that pleases the wise, completed the text at the source of the teachings of explanation and practice, the great monastery of Gönlung Jampa Ling, when I had reached my sixty-fifth year, on a day good for nectar practice: the eighth day, that is, the second “conqueror” day, of the waxing moon of the twelfth month of the female iron-bird year, the Durmati year.
1️⃣ The transcription was made by the scribes: the bhikṣu from Ordusu Hangzin, Losang Darma; the bhikṣu from Othok, Ngawang Phüntsok; and the bhikṣu from Chundrar, Yeshé Palden.
Through this, may the stainless tradition of the conqueror who is the essence of Mañjughoṣa, Tsongkhapa, be widespread in all directions, times, and circumstances, and may it remain for a long time to come.
When I got near the end of writing this treatise on philosophical systems, I was ill for a long time; nevertheless, with determination, I brought it to completion.
The corrections I made were rough; since I could not make them in detail, it is possible that some mistakes still remain, and they should be amended.
1️⃣ May goodness increase!